---
title: CHAPTER 484 WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION COMPACTS
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 484
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION COMPACTS
----------------------------------------

Connecticut River Flood Control Compact
---------------------------------------

### Section 484:1

 **484:1 Interstate Compact. â€“** The governor and council, on behalf
of this state, are authorized to enter into and execute a compact
substantially in the following form with the states of Vermont,
Massachusetts and Connecticut, by and through the commissioners or duly
authorized representatives appointed or who may be appointed under or by
virtue of a law of the legislatures of the respective states, and the
legislature signifies in advance its approval and ratification of such
compact, so entered into, such approval and ratification to be effective
as set forth in this compact:
                                             
 Whereas, the federal government exercises jurisdiction over the
nation's navigable rivers and their tributaries through passage of the
Flood Control Act of 1936 and various amendments to that act; and
                                             
 Whereas, these acts provide for construction by the United States of
dams for flood control and, where feasible, in addition to flood
control, for storage of water to be used for irrigation, recreation or
hydroelectric power or for any of these purposes; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Connecticut is an interstate river and control of major
floods on it can be obtained only by the construction of dams by the
United States under authorization of the above mentioned acts; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the states of
Connecticut, New Hampshire and Vermont recognize that it is in the
interest of their general welfare that the United States construct in
the Connecticut River Valley a comprehensive system of local protection
works and dams and reservoirs to control floods and prevent loss of life
and property, the disruption of orderly processes and the impairment of
commerce between the aforesaid states; and
                                             
 Whereas, the United States has constructed dikes, flood walls and
other local protection works at Hartford and East Hartford in the state
of Connecticut, and at Springfield, Riverdale, West Springfield,
Chicopee, Northampton, Holyoke, and Springdale in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and dams and reservoirs for the storage of flood waters
at Knightville, Birch Hill and Tully in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, at Surry Mountain in the state of New Hampshire and at
Union Village in the state of Vermont and has reached agreements with
the state in which these facilities are located for construction of dams
and reservoirs for the storage of flood waters at Barre Falls in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and at Ball Mountain and at Townshend in
the state of Vermont; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Congress has at various times authorized construction
by the United States of other dams and reservoirs for the storage of
flood waters in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and in the states of
New Hampshire and Vermont and has more recently instructed the Corps of
Engineers to determine what additional local protection works and dams
and reservoirs are required for a comprehensive system to control floods
in the Connecticut River and its tributaries; and
                                             
 Whereas, it is believed that such a comprehensive flood control
system should include dams and reservoirs controlling flood runoff from
approximately 25 percent of the total drainage area of the Connecticut
River above Hartford, Connecticut, and strategically located in
reference to characteristics of tributaries and to damage centers; and
                                             
 Whereas, construction by the United States of additional dams and
reservoirs in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and in the states of New
Hampshire and Vermont to complete such a comprehensive flood control
system will remove from the tax rolls of local governments of those
states such property as is acquired by the United States and may work
other hardships against the people of Massachusetts, New Hampshire and
Vermont; and
                                             
 Whereas, it is highly desirable that any flood control dam and
reservoir constructed by the United States in the Connecticut River
Valley have the approval of the state in which it is located and that
states benefiting from construction of such dam and reservoir make
reimbursement for such loss of taxes and for such hardships; and
                                             
 Whereas, a comprehensive system for the prevention of destructive
floods and for water resources utilization in the Connecticut River
Valley can best be accomplished by cooperation between the several
states in the valley and by and through a common and joint agency of
said several states;
                                             
 Now, therefore, the said Commonwealth of Massachusetts and states of
Connecticut, New Hampshire and Vermont do enter into the following
compact, to-wit:

**Article I**


                                             
 The principal purposes of this compact are: (a) to promote
interstate comity among and between the signatory states; (b) to assure
adequate storage capacity for impounding the waters of the Connecticut
River and its tributaries for the protection of life and property from
floods; and (c) to provide a joint or common agency through which the
signatory states, while promoting, protecting and preserving to each the
local interest and sovereignty of the respective signatory states, may
more effectively cooperate in accomplishing the object of flood control
and water resources utilization in the basin of the Connecticut River
and its tributaries.

**Article II**


                                             
 There is created "The Connecticut River Valley Flood Control
Commission,'' referred to in this compact as the "commission,'' which
shall consist of 12 members, 3 of whom shall be residents of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 3 of whom shall be residents of the state
of Connecticut, 3 of whom shall be residents of the state of New
Hampshire, and 3 of whom shall be residents of the state of Vermont.
                                             
 The members of the commission shall be chosen by their respective
states in such manner and for such term as may be fixed and determined
from time to time by the law of each of said states respectively by
which they are appointed. A member of the commission may be removed or
suspended from office as provided by the law of the state for which he
shall be appointed, and any vacancy occurring in the commission shall be
filled in accordance with the laws of the state in which such vacancy
exists.
                                             
 A majority of the members from each state shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, the exercise of any of its powers or
the performance of any of its duties, but no action of the commission
shall be binding unless at least 2 of the members from each state shall
vote in favor of such action.
                                             
 The compensation of members of the commission shall be fixed,
determined, and paid by the state which they respectively represent. All
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties shall be
paid from the funds of the commission.
                                             
 The commission shall elect from its members a chairman,
vice-chairman, clerk and treasurer. Such treasurer shall furnish to the
commission, at its expense, a bond with corporate surety, to be approved
by the commission, in such amount as the commission may determine,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties.
                                             
 The commission shall adopt suitable bylaws and shall make such rules
and regulations as it may deem advisable not inconsistent with laws of
the United States, of the signatory states or with any rules or
regulations lawfully promulgated under this compact.
                                             
 The commission shall make an annual report to the governor and
legislature of each of the signatory states, setting forth in detail the
operations and transactions conducted by it pursuant to this compact.
                                             
 The commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and
proceedings, contracts and accounts, and shall maintain a suitable
office, where its maps, plans, documents, records and accounts shall be
kept, subject to public inspection at such times and under such
regulations as the commission shall determine.

**Article III**


                                             
 The commission shall constitute a body, both corporate and politic,
with full power and authority: (1) to sue and be sued; (2) to have a
seal and alter the same at pleasure; (3) to appoint and employ such
agents and employees as may be required in the proper performance of the
duties committed to it and to fix and determine their qualifications,
duties and compensation; (4) to enter into such contracts and agreements
and to do and perform any and all other acts, matters and things as may
be necessary and essential to the full and complete performance of the
powers and duties committed to and imposed upon it and as may be
incidental to such powers and duties; and (5) to have such additional
powers and duties as may hereafter be delegated to or imposed upon it
from time to time by the action of the legislature of any of said
states, concurred in by the legislatures of the other states and by the
Congress of the United States.
                                             
 The commission shall make, or cause to be made, such studies as it
may deem necessary, in cooperation with the Corps of Engineers and other
federal agencies, for the development of a comprehensive plan for flood
control and for utilization of the water resources of the Connecticut
River Valley.
                                             
 The commission shall not pledge the credit of the signatory states
or any of them.

**Article IV**


                                             
 The signatory state in which is located the site of each of the
following dams and reservoirs agrees to the construction by the United
States of each such dam and reservoir in accordance with authorization
by the Congress: In the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, (1) at Barre
Falls on the Ware River controlling a drainage area of approximately 57
square miles and providing flood storage of approximately 8 inches of
runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 In the state of Vermont:
                                             
 (1) At West Townshend on the West River controlling a net
drainagearea of approximately 106 square miles and providing flood
control storage of approximately 6 inches of runoff from said drainage
area.
                                             
 (2) At Ball Mountain on the West River controlling a net drainage
area of approximately 132 square miles and providing flood control
storage of approximately 6 inches of runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 (3) At North Hartland on the Ottauquechee River controlling a
drainage area of approximately 222 square miles and providing flood
control storage for approximately 6 inches of runoff from said drainage
area.
                                             
 (4) At Groton Pond on the Wells River controlling a drainage area
of approximately 17.3 square miles and providing flood control storage
for approximately 8 inches of runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 (5) At Victory on the Moose River controlling a drainage area of
approximately 66 square miles and providing flood control storage for
approximately 7 inches of runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 (6) In Bloomfield on the Nulhegan River controlling a drainage
area of approximately 70 square miles and providing flood control
storage for approximately 9 inches of runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 In the state of New Hampshire:
                                             
 (1) At South Keene on the Otter Brook, tributary of the Ashuelot
River, controlling a drainage area of approximately 47 square miles and
providing flood control storage for approximately 7 inches of runoff
from said drainage area.
                                             
 (2) At Walpole on the Cold River controlling a drainage area of
approximately 101 square miles and providing flood control storage for
approximately 8 inches of runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 (3) At Bethlehem Junction on the Ammonoosuc River controlling a
drainage area of approximately 90 square miles and providing flood
control storage for approximately 6 inches of runoff from said drainage
area.
                                             
 (4) At Franconia on the Ammonoosuc River controlling a drainage
area of approximately 30 square miles and providing flood control
storage for approximately 8 inches of runoff from said drainage area.
                                             
 (5) At Swiftwater on the Wild Ammonoosuc River controlling a
drainage area of approximately 57 square miles and providing flood
control storage for approximately 10 inches of runoff from said drainage
area.

**Article V**


                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts agrees to reimburse the state of
New Hampshire 50 percent and the state of Vermont 50 percent of the
amount of taxes lost to their political subdivisions by reason of
ownership by the United States of lands, rights or other property
therein for the flood control dams and reservoirs at Surry Mountain in
New Hampshire and at Union Village in Vermont.
                                             
 The state of Connecticut agrees to reimburse the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts 40 percent, the state of New Hampshire 40 percent and the
state of Vermont 40 percent of the amount of taxes lost to their
political subdivisions by reason of ownership by the United States of
lands, rights or other property therein for the flood control dams and
reservoirs at Tully, at Knightville and at Birch Hill in Massachusetts,
at Surry Mountain in New Hampshire and at Union Village in Vermont.
                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts agrees to reimburse the state of
New Hampshire 50 percent and the state of Vermont 50 percent of the
amount of taxes lost to their political subdivisions by reason of
acquisition and ownership by the United States of lands, rights or other
property therein for construction in the future of any flood control dam
and reservoir specified in Article IV and also for any other flood
control dam and reservoir hereafter constructed by the United States in
the Connecticut River Valley.
                                             
 The state of Connecticut agrees to reimburse the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts 40 percent, the state of New Hampshire 40 percent and the
state of Vermont 40 percent of the amount of taxes lost to their
political subdivisions by reason of acquisition and ownership by the
United States of lands, rights or other property therein for
construction in the future of any flood control dam and reservoir
specified in Article IV and also for any other flood control dam and
reservoir hereafter constructed by the United States in the Connecticut
River Valley.
                                             
 Annually, not later than November 1 of each year, the commission
shall determine the loss of taxes resulting to political subdivisions of
each signatory state by reason of acquisition and ownership therein by
the United States of lands, rights or other property in connection with
each flood control dam and reservoir for which provision for tax
reimbursement has been made in the four paragraphs next above. Such
losses of taxes as determined by the commission shall be based on the
tax rate then current in each such political subdivision and on the
average assessed valuation for a period of 5 years prior to the
acquisition by the United States of such property; provided that
whenever a political subdivision in which a flood control dam and
reservoir or portion of such dam or reservoir is located shall have made
a general revaluation of property subject to the annual municipal taxes
of such subdivision, the commission may use such revaluation for the
purpose of determining the amount of taxes for which reimbursement shall
be made. Using the percentage of payment agreed to in said four
paragraphs, the commission shall then compute the sum, if any, due from
each signatory state to each other signatory state and shall send a
notice to the treasurer of each signatory state setting forth in detail
the sums, if any, each is to pay to and to receive from each other
signatory state in reimbursement of tax losses.
                                             
 Each signatory state on receipt of formal notification from the
commission of the sum which it is to pay in reimbursement for tax losses
shall, not later than July 1 of the following year, make its payment for
such tax losses to the signatory state in which such loss or losses
occur, except that in case of the first annual payment for tax losses at
any dam or reservoir such payment shall be made by payor states not
later than July 1 of the year in which the next regular session of its
legislature is held. Payment by a signatory state of its share of
reimbursement for taxes in accordance with formal notification received
from the commission shall be a complete and final discharge of all
liability by the payor state to the payee state for each flood control
dam and reservoir within the payee state for the time specified in such
formal notification. Each payee signatory state shall have full
responsibility for distributing or expending all such sums received, and
no agency or political subdivision shall have any claim against any
signatory state other than the payee state, nor against the commission
relative to tax losses covered by such payments.
                                             
 Whenever a state which makes reimbursement for tax losses and a
state which receives such reimbursement from it shall agree, through the
commission, on a lump sum payment in lieu of annual payments and such
lump sum payment has been made and received, the requirement that the
commission annually shall determine the tax losses, compute sums due
from each state and send notice thereof to the treasurer of each state
shall no longer apply to the aforesaid states with respect to any flood
control dam and reservoir for which lump sum payment has been made and
received.
                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state of Connecticut each
agrees to pay its respective share in reimbursement, as determined by
the commission under the procedure following, for economic losses and
damages occurring by reason of ownership of property by the United
States for construction and operation of a flood control dam and
reservoir at any site specified in Article IV, and for any other flood
control dam and reservoir constructed hereafter by the United States in
the Connecticut River Valley; provided, however, that no reimbursement
shall be made for speculative losses and damages or losses or damages
for which the United States is liable.
                                             
 On receipt of information from the chief of engineers that request
is to be made for funds for the purpose of preparing detailed plans and
specifications for any flood control dam and reservoir proposed to be
constructed in the Connecticut River Valley, including those specified
in Article IV, the commission shall make an estimate of the amount of
taxes which would be lost to and of economic losses and damages which
would occur in political subdivisions of the signatory state in which
such dam and reservoir would be located, wholly or in part, by reason of
acquisition and ownership by the United States of lands, rights or other
property for the construction and operation of such flood control dam
and reservoir and shall decide whether the flood control benefits to be
derived in the signatory states from such flood control dam and
reservoir, both by itself and as a unit of a comprehensive flood control
plan, justifies, in the opinion of the commission, the assumption by
signatory states of the obligation to make reimbursement for loss of
taxes and for economic losses and damages. Such estimate and decision
shall thereafter be reviewed by the commission at 5-year intervals until
such time as the United States shall have acquired title to the site of
such flood control dam or plans for its construction are abandoned. The
commission shall notify the governor, the members of the United States
Senate and the members of the United States House of Representatives
from each signatory state and the chief of engineers as to the
commission's decision and as to any change in such decision.
                                             
 On receipt of information from the chief of engineers that any flood
control dam and reservoir is to be constructed, reconstructed, altered
or used for any purpose in addition to flood control, including those
flood control dams and reservoirs previously constructed and those
specified in Article IV, the commission shall make a separate estimate
of the amount of taxes which would be lost to and of economic losses and
damages which would occur in political subdivisions of the signatory
state in which such dam and reservoir would be located, wholly or in
part, by reason of acquisition and ownership by the United States of
lands, rights or other property for the construction and operation of
such dam and reservoir in excess of the estimated amount of taxes which
would be lost and of the economic losses and damages which would occur
if the dam were constructed and operated for flood control only and the
commission shall decide the extent to which, in its opinion, the
signatory states would be justified in making reimbursement for loss of
taxes and for economic losses and damages in addition to reimbursement
for such dam and reservoir if constructed and used for flood control
only. Such estimate and decision shall thereafter be reviewed by the
commission at 5-year intervals until such time as such dam and reservoir
shall be so constructed, reconstructed, altered or used or plans for
such construction, reconstruction, alteration or use are abandoned. The
commission shall notify the governor, the members of the United States
Senate and the members of the United States House of Representatives
from each signatory state as to the commission's decision and as to any
change in such decision.
                                             
 Within 30 days after acquisition by the United States of the site of
any flood control dam, the commission shall proceed to make a final
determination of economic losses and damages occasioned by such dam and
reservoir. The commission shall not include in such determination either
speculative losses and damages or losses and damages for which the
United States is liable.
                                             
 The commission shall compute the share the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the state of Connecticut shall each pay to the state
in which such dam or reservoir is located by multiplying the sum of such
losses and damages, as previously determined, by the percentage of flood
control benefits which the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state
of Connecticut each receives, in the allocation by states, of the flood
control benefits resulting from the dam and reservoir.
                                             
 The commission shall send a notice to the treasurer of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and to the treasurer of the state of
Connecticut setting forth in detail the sum, if any, each is to pay to
the state in which such dam and reservoir is located in reimbursement
for economic losses and damages and shall also send such notice to the
treasurer of the state in which such dam and reservoir is located.
                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state of Connecticut on
receipt of such formal notification by the commission shall each pay its
share of such economic losses or damages to the signatory states in
which such losses or damages occur. Full payment by either state of the
sum specified in such formal notification from the commission as to the
amount of economic losses and damages for which such state is to make
reimbursement shall be a complete and final discharge of all liability
by the payor state to the payee state for economic losses and damages
for each flood control dam and reservoir within the payee state
designated in such formal notification. Each payee signatory state shall
have full responsibility for distributing or expending all such sums
received and no agency, political subdivision, private person,
partnership, firm, association or corporation shall have any claim
against any signatory state other than the payee state, nor against the
commission relative to such economic losses and damages.
                                             
 A signatory state may, in agreement with the commission and the
chief of engineers, acquire title or option to acquire title to any or
all lands, rights or other property required for any flood control dam
and reservoir within its boundaries and transfer such titles or options
to the United States. Whenever the fair cost to said signatory state for
such titles or options, as determined by the commission, is greater than
the amount received therefor from the United States, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the state of Connecticut shall each pay its share of
such excess cost to said signatory state, such share to be determined by
the commission in accordance with procedure contained in this compact
for determining reimbursement for economic losses and damages.
                                             
 Whenever the commission shall not agree, within a reasonable time or
within 60 days after a formal request from the governor of any signatory
state, concerning reimbursement for loss of taxes or for economic losses
and damages at any flood control dam and reservoir previously or
hereafter constructed by the United States in the Connecticut River
Valley, or concerning the extent, if any, to which reimbursement shall
be made for additional loss of taxes and for additional economic losses
and damages caused by construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of
any such dam for purposes other than flood control, the governor of each
signatory state shall designate a person from his state as a member of a
board of arbitration, hereinafter called the board, and the members so
designated shall choose one additional member who shall be chairman of
such board. Whenever the members appointed by the governors to such
board shall not agree within 60 days on such additional member of the
board, the governors of such signatory states shall jointly designate
the additional member. The board shall by majority vote decide the
question referred to it and shall do so in accordance with the
provisions of this compact concerning such reimbursement. The decision
of the board on each question referred to it concerning reimbursement
for loss of taxes and for economic losses and damages shall be binding
on the commission and on each signatory state, notwithstanding any other
provision of this compact.

**Article VI**


                                             
 Nothing contained in this compact shall be construed as a limitation
upon the authority of the United States.

**Article VII**


                                             
 The signatory states agree to appropriate for compensation of agents
and employees of the commission and for office, administrative, travel
and other expenses on recommendation of the commission subject to
limitations as follows: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts obligates
itself to not more than 
                                             $7,500 in any one year, the state of New
Hampshire obligates itself to not more than 
                                             $1,000 in any one year, the
state of Vermont obligates itself to not more than 
                                             $1,000 in any one
year and the state of Connecticut obligates itself to not more than

                                             $6,500 in any one year.

**Article VIII**


                                             
 Should any part of this compact be held to be contrary to the
constitution of any signatory state or of the United States, all other
parts of the compact shall continue to be in full force and effect.

**Article IX**


                                             
 This compact shall become operative and effective when ratified by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the states of New Hampshire,
Vermont and Connecticut and approved by the Congress of the United
States. Notice of ratification shall be given by the governor of each
state to the governors of the other states and to the President of the
United States, and the President of the United States is requested to
give notice to the governors of each of the signatory states of approval
by the Congress of the United States.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:2

 **484:2 Procedure for Notification and Recordation of Compact. â€“**
The said agreement or compact when ratified by the legislatures of each
of said states and approved by the Congress of the United States, shall
thereupon become operative and effective. The governor is authorized and
directed forthwith to notify the governors, respectively, of the said
states and the President of the United States, that the state of New
Hampshire on its part has approved and ratified said compact or
agreement. Upon its execution in quintuplicate by the commissioners or
representatives of each of said states as previously stated, a duly
executed original of the compact shall be filed in the office of the
secretary of state of the state of New Hampshire, together with the
original notice of ratification received from the governors of the
remaining signatory states, and such notice, if any, as may be received
from the President or the Congress of the United States, signifying the
approval of such Congress to the compact.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:3

 **484:3 Appointment of Commission. â€“** Within 30 days after such
agreement or compact shall have become effective as provided in RSA
484:2, the governor shall, with advice and consent of the council,
appoint 3 members of the Connecticut River Valley Flood Control
Commission, one of whom shall serve until May 1, 1952, and one of whom
shall serve until May 1, 1953, and one of whom shall serve until May 1,
1954. In the month of April, 1952, and each year thereafter, the
governor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, shall
appoint one member of the said commission, whose term of office shall be
3 years from and after May 1 of the year in which he is appointed.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:4

 **484:4 Vacancies. â€“** If a vacancy occurs in the commission, the
governor shall, with the advice and consent of the council, appoint a
member to serve only for the unexpired term. Any member of the
commission shall be eligible for reappointment.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:5

 **484:5 Compensation. â€“** Each commissioner designated or appointed
by the governor and council, who, while such commissioner holds no
salaried state office, shall be paid by the state as compensation the
sum of 
                                             $30 for each day's service performed in connection with his
duties as such commissioner but not to exceed 
                                             $600 in any fiscal year.
Such compensation shall be paid by the state treasurer, upon warrant of
the governor, with the advice and consent of the council, upon bills
approved by the chairman or vice chairman and treasurer of the
commission. All commissioners shall be entitled to their actual expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties as such.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:6

 **484:6 Designation of Alternate. â€“** Each commissioner designated
or appointed under this compact may appoint an alternate member to serve
in his place at meetings of the commission that he is unable to attend;
provided, however, that whenever a member is a state employee, his
alternate shall also be a state employee. All such appointments shall be
made in writing, with written notification to the commission identifying
the alternate member. Alternate members shall receive no compensation.
Each commissioner may not appoint more than one alternate, and at no
meeting shall one alternate represent more than one commissioner.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Merrimack River Flood Control Compact
-------------------------------------

### Section 484:7

 **484:7 Interstate Compact. â€“** The governor and council, on behalf
of this state, are authorized to enter into and execute a compact
substantially in the following form with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, by and through the commissioners or duly authorized
representatives appointed or who may be appointed under or by virtue of
a law of the legislature of the state of New Hampshire, and the
legislature hereby signifies in advance its approval and ratification of
such compact, so entered into, such approval and ratification to be
effective as set forth in this compact:
                                             
 Whereas, the federal government exercises jurisdiction over the
nation's navigable rivers and their tributaries through passage of the
Flood Control Act of 1936 and various other amendments to that act; and
                                             
 Whereas, these acts provide for construction by the United States of
dams for flood control and, where feasible, in addition to flood
control, for storage of water to be used for irrigation, recreation or
hydroelectric power or for any of these purposes; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Merrimack is an interstate river and control of major
floods on it can be obtained only by the construction of dams by the
United States under authorization of the above-mentioned acts; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state of New
Hampshire recognize that it is in the interest of their general welfare
that the United States construct in the Merrimack River Valley a
comprehensive system of local protection works and dams and reservoirs
to control floods and prevent loss of life and property, the disruption
of orderly processes and the impairment of commerce between the said 2
states; and
                                             
 Whereas, the United States has constructed dikes, flood walls and
other local protection works at Nashua in the state of New Hampshire and
at Haverhill, Lowell and Fitchburg in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
and dams and reservoirs for the storage of flood waters at Franklin
Falls, Peterborough and at Webster in the state of New Hampshire, and
has prepared designs for dikes and flood walls and other local
protection works at Lawrence and North Andover in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Congress has at various times authorized construction
by the United States of other dams and reservoirs for the storage of
flood waters in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and in the state of
New Hampshire and has more recently instructed the Corps of Engineers to
determine what additional local protection works and dams and reservoirs
are required for a comprehensive system to control floods in the
Merrimack River and its tributaries; and
                                             
 Whereas, it is believed that such a comprehensive flood control
system should include dams and reservoirs controlling flood runoff from
approximately 30 percent of the total drainage area of the Merrimack
River Basin and strategically located in reference to characteristics of
tributaries and to damage centers; and
                                             
 Whereas, dams and reservoirs to control 30 percent of flood runoff
will be located in the state of New Hampshire and the major benefits
from such dams and reservoirs will accrue to the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts; and
                                             
 Whereas, construction by the United States of additional dams and
reservoirs in the state of New Hampshire to complete such a
comprehensive flood control system will remove from the tax rolls of
local governments of the state of New Hampshire such property as is
acquired by the United States and may work other hardships against the
people of New Hampshire; and
                                             
 Whereas, it is highly desirable that any flood control dam and
reservoir constructed by the United States in the Merrimack River Valley
have the approval of the state of New Hampshire and the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts benefiting from
construction of such dam and reservoir make reimbursement for such loss
of taxes and for such hardships; and
                                             
 Whereas, a comprehensive system for the prevention of destructive
floods and for water resources utilization in the Merrimack River Valley
can best be accomplished by cooperation between the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the state of New Hampshire and by and through a common
and joint agency of said 2 states;
                                             
 Now, therefore, the said Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state
of New Hampshire do enter into the following compact, to wit:

**Article I**


                                             
 The principal purposes of this compact are: (a) to promote
interstate comity among and between the signatory states; (b) to provide
adequate storage capacity for impounding the waters of the Merrimack
River and its tributaries for the protection of life and property from
floods; and (c) to provide a joint or common agency through which the
signatory states, while promoting, protecting and preserving to each the
local interest and sovereignty of the respective signatory states, may
more effectively cooperate in accomplishing the object of flood control
and water resources utilization in the basin of the Merrimack River and
its tributaries.

**Article II**


                                             
 There is created "The Merrimack River Valley Flood Control
Commission,'' referred to in this compact as the "commission,'' which
shall consist of 6 members, 3 of whom shall be residents of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and one of whom shall be a resident of the
Merrimack Valley, and 3 of whom shall be residents of the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 The members of the commission shall be chosen by their respective
states in such manner and for such term as may be fixed and determined
from time to time by the law of each of said states, respectively, by
which they are appointed. A member of the commission may be removed or
suspended from office as provided by the law of the state from which he
shall be appointed, and any vacancy occurring in the commission shall be
filled in accordance with the laws of the state in which such vacancy
exists.
                                             
 A majority of the members of each state shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, the exercise of any powers or the
performance of any duties, but no action of the commission shall be
binding unless at least 2 members from each state shall vote in favor of
such action.
                                             
 The compensation of members of the commission shall be fixed,
determined, and paid by the state which they respectively represent. All
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties shall be
paid from the funds of the commission.
                                             
 The commission shall elect from its members a chairman,
vice-chairman, clerk and treasurer. Such treasurer shall furnish to the
commission, at its expense, a bond with corporate surety, to be approved
by the commission, in such amount as the commission may determine,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties.
                                             
 The commission shall adopt suitable bylaws and shall make such rules
and regulations as it may deem advisable not inconsistent with laws of
the United States, of the signatory states or with any rules or
regulations lawfully promulgated thereunder.
                                             
 The commission shall make an annual report to the governor and
legislature of each of the signatory states, setting forth in detail the
operations and transactions conducted by it pursuant to this compact.
                                             
 The commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and
proceedings, contracts and accounts, and shall maintain a suitable
office, where its maps, plans, documents, records and accounts shall be
kept, subject to public inspection at such times and under such
regulations as the commission shall determine.

**Article III**


                                             
 The commission shall constitute a body, both corporate and politic,
with full power and authority: (1) to sue and be sued; (2) to have a
seal and alter the same at pleasure; (3) to appoint and employ such
agents and employees as may be required in the proper performance of the
duties committed to it and to fix and determine their qualifications,
duties and compensation; (4) to enter into such contracts and agreements
and to do and perform any and all other acts, matters and things as may
be necessary and essential to the full and complete performance of the
powers and duties hereby committed to and imposed upon it and as may be
incidental thereto; and (5) to have such additional powers and duties as
may hereafter be delegated to or imposed upon it from time to time by
the action of the legislature of either of said states, concurred in by
the legislature of the other state and by the Congress of the United
States.
                                             
 The commission shall make, or cause to be made, such studies as it
may deem necessary, in cooperation with the Corps of Engineers and other
federal agencies, for the development of a comprehensive plan for flood
control and for utilization of the water resources of the Merrimack
River Valley.
                                             
 The commission shall not pledge the credit of the signatory states
or either of them.

**Article IV**


                                             
 The state of New Hampshire in which is located the site of each of
the following dams and reservoirs agrees to the construction by the
United States of each such dam and reservoir in accordance with
authorization by the Congress:
                                             
 (1) At West Hopkinton on the Contoocook River, controlling a
drainage area of approximately 426 square miles, and near East Weare, on
the north branch of the Piscataquog River, controlling a drainage area
of approximately 64 square miles, and providing flood control storage
for approximately 6 inches of runoff over both said drainage areas; and
                                             
 (2) Near Loudon on the Soucook River, controlling a drainage area
of approximately 77 square miles and providing flood control storage for
approximately 6 inches of runoff over said drainage area.

**Article V**


                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts agrees to reimburse the state of
New Hampshire 70 percent of the amount of taxes lost by reason of
acquisition and ownership by the United States of lands, rights or other
property therein for the flood control dams and reservoirs at Franklin
Falls, Blackwater and West Peterborough, and for construction in the
future of any flood control dam and reservoir specified in Article IV,
and also for any other flood control dam and reservoir constructed in
the future by the United States in the Merrimack River Valley.
                                             
 Annually, not later than November 1 of each year, the commission
shall determine the loss of taxes resulting to political subdivisions of
the state of New Hampshire by reason of acquisition and ownership
therein by the United States of lands, rights or other property in
connection with each flood control dam and reservoir for which provision
for tax reimbursement has been made in the preceding paragraphs. Such
losses of taxes as determined by the commission shall be based on the
tax rate then current in each such political subdivision and on the
average assessed valuation for a period of 5 years prior to the
acquisition by the United States of such property; provided, that
whenever a political subdivision wherein a flood control dam and
reservoir or portion thereof is located shall have made a general
revaluation of property subject to the annual municipal taxes of such
subdivision, the commission may use such revaluation for the purpose of
determining the amount of taxes for which reimbursement shall be made in
the paragraph next above. Using the percentage of payment agreed to in
said paragraph, the commission shall then compute the sum, if any, due
from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to the state of New Hampshire and
shall send notice to the treasurer of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
setting forth in detail the sums, if any, to be paid to New Hampshire in
reimbursement of tax losses due from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
to the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, on receipt of formal notification
from the commission of the sum which it is to pay in reimbursement for
tax losses, shall, not later than July 1 of the following year, make its
payment for such tax losses to the state of New Hampshire, except that
in case of the first annual payment for tax losses at any dam or
reservoir such payment shall be made by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts not later than July 1 of the year in which the next
regular session of its legislature is held.
                                             
 Payment by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts of its share of
reimbursement for taxes in accordance with formal notification received
from the commission shall be a complete and final discharge of all
liability of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to the state of New
Hampshire for each flood control dam and reservoir within the State of
New Hampshire for the time specified in such formal notification. The
state of New Hampshire shall have full responsibility for distributing
or expending all such sums received, and no agency or political
subdivision shall have any claim against the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, nor against the commission relative to tax losses covered
by such payments.
                                             
 Whenever the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state of New
Hampshire shall agree, through the commission, on a lump sum payment in
lieu of annual payments and such lump sum payment has been made and
received, the requirement that the commission annually shall determine
the tax losses, compute sums due from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
and send notice of such sums to the treasurer of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts shall no longer apply to the 2 states with respect to any
flood control dam and reservoir for which lump sum payment has been made
and received.
                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts agrees to pay the state of New
Hampshire its respective share in reimbursement, as determined by the
commission under the procedure following, for economic losses and
damages occurring by reason of ownership of property by the United
States, for construction and operation of a flood control dam and
reservoir at any site specified in Article IV, and for any other flood
control dam and reservoir constructed hereafter by the United States in
the Merrimack River Valley, provided, that no reimbursement shall be
made for speculative losses and damages or losses or damages for which
the United States is liable.
                                             
 On receipt of information from the chief of engineers that request
is to be made for funds for the purpose of preparing detailed plans and
specifications for any flood control dam and reservoir proposed to be
constructed in the Merrimack River Valley, including those specified in
Article IV, the commission shall make an estimate of the amount of taxes
which would be lost to and of economic losses and damages which would
occur in political subdivisions of the state of New Hampshire in which
such dam and reservoir would be located, wholly or in part, by reason of
acquisition and ownership by the United States of lands, rights or other
property for the construction and operation of such flood control dam
and reservoir and shall decide whether the flood control benefits to be
derived in the signatory states from such flood control dam and
reservoir, both by itself and as a unit of a comprehensive flood control
plan, justifies, in the opinion of the commission, the assumption by a
signatory state of the obligation to make reimbursement for loss of
taxes and for economic losses and damages. Such estimate and decision
shall thereafter be reviewed by the commission at 5-year intervals until
such time as the United States shall have acquired title to the site of
such flood control dam or plans for its construction are abandoned. The
commission shall notify the governor, the members of the United States
Senate and the members of the United States House of Representatives
from each signatory state and the chief of engineers as to the
commission's decision and as to any change in such decision.
                                             
 On receipt of information from the chief of engineers that any flood
control dam and reservoir is to be constructed, reconstructed, altered
or used for any purpose in addition to flood control, including those
flood control dams and reservoirs previously constructed and those
specified in Article IV, the commission shall make a separate estimate
of the amount of taxes which would be lost to and of economic losses and
damages which would occur in political subdivisions of the signatory
state in which such dam and reservoir would be located, wholly or in
part, by reason of acquisition and ownership by the United States of
lands, rights or other property for the construction and operation of
such dam and reservoir in excess of the estimated amount of taxes which
would be lost and of the economic losses and damages which would occur
if the dam were constructed and operated for flood control only and the
commission shall decide the extent to which, in its opinion, the
signatory states would be justified in making reimbursement for loss of
taxes and for economic losses and damages in addition to reimbursement
for such dam and reservoir if constructed and used for flood control
only. Such estimate and decision shall thereafter be reviewed by the
commission at 5-year intervals until such time as such dam and reservoir
shall be so constructed, reconstructed, altered or used or plans for
such construction, reconstruction, alterations or use are abandoned. The
commission shall notify the governor, the members of the United States
Senate and the members of the United States House of Representatives
from each signatory state as to the commission's decision and as to any
change in such decision.
                                             
 Within 30 days after acquisition by the United States of the site of
any flood control dam, the commission shall proceed to make a final
determination of economic losses and damages occasioned by such dam and
reservoir. The commission shall not include in such determination either
speculative losses and damages or losses and damages for which the
United States is liable.
                                             
 The commission shall compute the share the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts shall pay to the state of New Hampshire by multiplying the
sum of such losses and damages, as previously determined, by the
percentage of flood control benefits which the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts receives of the flood control benefits resulting from the
dam and reservoir.
                                             
 The commission shall send a notice to the treasurer of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, setting forth in detail the sum, if any,
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is to pay to the state of New
Hampshire in reimbursement for economic losses and damages and shall
also send such notice to the treasurer of the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, on receipt of such formal
notification by the commission, shall pay its share of such economic
losses or damages to the state of New Hampshire. Full payment by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts of the sum specified in such formal
notification from the commission as to the amount of economic losses and
damages for which the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is to make
reimbursement shall be a complete and final discharge of all liability
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to the state of New Hampshire for
economic losses and damages for each flood control dam and reservoir
within the said state designated in such formal notification. The state
of New Hampshire shall have full responsibility for distributing or
expending all such sums received, and no agency, political subdivision,
private person, partnership, firm, association nor corporation shall
have any claim against the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor against
the commission relative to such economic losses and damages.
                                             
 The state of New Hampshire may, in agreement with the commission and
the chief of engineers, acquire title or option to acquire title to any
or all lands, rights or other property required for any flood control
dam and reservoir within its boundaries, and transfer such titles or
options to the United States. Whenever the fair cost to said signatory
state for such titles or options, as determined by the commission, is
greater than the amount received therefor from the United States, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall pay its share of such excess cost to
said state of New Hampshire, such share to be determined by the
commission in accordance with procedure contained in this compact for
determining reimbursement for economic losses and damages.
                                             
 Whenever the commission shall not agree, within a reasonable time or
within 60 days after a formal request from the governor of the state of
New Hampshire or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, concerning
reimbursement for loss of taxes or for economic losses and damages at
any flood control dam and reservoir previously or hereafter constructed
by the United States in the Merrimack River Valley, or concerning the
extent, if any, to which reimbursement shall be made for additional loss
of taxes and for additional economic losses and damages caused by
construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of any such dam for
purposes other than flood control, the governor of each signatory state
shall designate a person from his state as a member of a board of
arbitration, hereinafter called the board, and the members so designated
shall choose one additional member who shall be chairman of such board.
Whenever the members appointed by the governors to such board shall not
agree within 60 days on such additional member of the board, the
governors of such signatory states shall jointly designate the
additional member. The board shall by majority vote decide the question
referred to it and shall do so in accordance with the provisions of this
compact concerning such reimbursement. The decision of the board on each
question referred to it concerning reimbursement for loss of taxes and
for economic losses and damages shall be binding on the commission and
on each signatory state, notwithstanding any other provision of this
compact.

**Article VI**


                                             
 Nothing contained in this compact shall be construed as a limitation
upon the authority of the United States.

**Article VII**


                                             
 The signatory states agree to appropriate for compensation of agents
and employees of the commission for office, administrative, travel and
other expenses on recommendation of the commission subject to
limitations as follows: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts obligates
itself to not more than 
                                             $17,500 for the first year and to not more than

                                             $14,000 in any one year thereafter; the state of New Hampshire
obligates itself to not more than 
                                             $7,500 the first year and to not more
than 
                                             $6,000 in any one year thereafter.

**Article VIII**


                                             
 Should any part of this compact be held to be contrary to the
constitution of either signatory state or of the United States, all
other parts of the compact shall continue to be in full force and
effect.

**Article IX**


                                             
 This compact shall become operative and effective when ratified by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state of New Hampshire, and
approved by the Congress of the United States. Notice of ratification
shall be given by the governor of each state to the governor of the
other state and to the President of the United States, and the President
of the United States is requested to give notice to the governors of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the state of New Hampshire of approval
by the Congress of the United States.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:8

 **484:8 Procedure for Notification and Recordation of Compact. â€“**
The said agreement or compact, when ratified by the legislature of each
of said states and approved by the Congress of the United States, shall
thereupon become operative and effective. The governor is authorized and
directed forthwith to notify the governor of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the President of the United States that the state of
New Hampshire on its part has approved and ratified said compact or
agreement. Upon its execution in triplicate by the commissioners or
representatives of each of said states as aforesaid, a duly executed
original of the compact shall be filed in the office of the secretary of
state of New Hampshire, together with the original notice of
ratification received from the governor of Massachusetts, and such
notice, if any, as may be received from the President or the Congress of
the United States, signifying the approval of such Congress to the
compact.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:9

 **484:9 Appointment of Commission. â€“** Within 30 days after the
aforesaid agreement or compact shall have become effective as provided
in RSA 484:8, the governor shall, with the advice and consent of the
council, appoint 3 members of the Merrimack River Valley Flood Control
Commission, one of whom shall serve until March 1, 1958, one of whom
shall serve until March 1, 1959 and one of whom shall serve until March
1, 1960. In the month of February 1958, and each year thereafter, the
governor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, shall
appoint one member of the said commission, whose term of office shall be
3 years from and after March 1 of the year in which he is appointed.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:10

 **484:10 Vacancies. â€“** If a vacancy occurs in the commission, the
governor shall, with the advice and consent of the council, appoint a
member to serve only for the unexpired term. Any member of the
commission shall be eligible for reappointment.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:11

 **484:11 Compensation. â€“** Each commissioner designated or appointed
by the governor and council, if he holds no salaried state office, shall
be paid by the state as compensation the sum of 
                                             $30 for each day's
service performed in connection with his duties as such commissioner but
not to exceed 
                                             $600 in any fiscal year. Such compensation shall be paid
by the state treasurer, upon warrant of the governor, with the advice
and consent of the council, upon bills approved by the chairman or vice
chairman and treasurer of the commission. All commissioners shall be
entitled to their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties as such.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:12

 **484:12 Designation of Alternate. â€“** Each commissioner designated
or appointed under this compact may appoint an alternate member to serve
in his place at meetings of the commission that he is unable to attend;
provided, however, that whenever a member is a state employee, his
alternate shall also be a state employee. All such appointments shall be
made in writing, with written notification to the commission identifying
the alternate member. Alternate members shall receive no compensation.
Each commissioner may not appoint more than one alternate, and at no
meeting shall one alternate represent more than one commissioner.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Northeastern Water and Related Land Resources Compact
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 484:13

 **484:13 Ratification. â€“** The governor on behalf of the state is
authorized to enter into a compact with any 2 or more of the states of
Connecticut, Maine, Rhode Island, Vermont and the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as follows:

**Article I**

**Findings**


                                             
 The northeastern part of the United States is by virtue of
geographic location and other characteristics a great natural resource
area which, with more intense use of natural resources, increasingly
requires coordinated planning as a basic ingredient of effective
resource management and orderly growth of the region. The work of the
New England-New York Interagency Committee demonstrated that a
continuation and furtherance of activities such as those undertaken by
it would be of great value. To this end, it is the intent of this
compact to establish and provide for the operation of a joint agency for
the northeast.

**Article II**

**Purpose**


                                             
 It is the purpose of this compact to provide, in the northeastern
region, improved facilities and procedures for the coordination of the
policies, programs, and activities of the United States, the several
states, and private persons or entities in the field of water and
related land resources, and to study, investigate, and plan the
development and use of the same and conservation of such water and
related land resources; to provide means by which conflicts may be
resolved; to provide procedures for coordination of the interests of all
public and private agencies, persons and entities in the field of water
and related land resources; and to provide an organization for
cooperation in such coordination on both the federal and state levels of
government.

**Article III**

**Creation of Commission**


                                             
 There is created the Northeastern Resources Commission, hereinafter
called the commission.

**Article IV**

**Membership**


                                             
 The commission shall consist of one member from each party state to
be appointed and to serve, in accordance with and subject to the laws of
the state which he represents, and 7 members representing departments or
agencies of the United States having principal responsibilities for
water and related land resources development to be appointed and to
serve in such manner as may be provided by the laws of the United
States.

**Article V**

**Functions**


                                             
 It shall be the responsibility of the commission to recommend to the
states and the United States, or any intergovernmental agency, changes
in law or policy which would promote coordination, or resolution of
problems, in the field of water and related land resources. The efforts
of the commission in coordination of work and resolution of conflicts
may be directed towards all state and federal activities involved in
water and related land resources development responsibilities and shall
include coordination of the following:
                                             
 (1) Collection and interpretation of basic data;
                                             
 (2) Investigation and planning of water and related land
resources projects;
                                             
 (3) Programming (including scheduling) of water and related land
resources construction and development;
                                             
 (4) Encouraging of the referral of plans or proposals for
resources projects to the commission.
                                             
 The commission shall use qualified public and private agencies to
make investigations and conduct research in the field of water and
related land resources, but if it is unable to secure the undertaking of
such investigations or original research by a qualified public or
private agency, it shall have the power to make its own investigations
and conduct its own research. The commission may make contracts with any
public or private agencies or private persons or entities for the
undertaking of such investigations, or original research within its
purview.

**Article VI**

**Voting**


                                             
 No action of the commission respecting the internal management of
the commission shall be binding unless taken at a meeting at which a
majority of the members are present and vote in favor of such action;
provided that any action not binding for such a reason may be ratified
within 30 days by the concurrence in writing of a majority of the
commission membership. No action of the commission respecting a matter
other than its internal management shall be binding unless taken at a
meeting at which a majority of the state members and a majority of the
members representing the United States are present and a majority of
said state members together with a majority of said members representing
the United States vote in favor of such action; provided that any action
not binding for such a reason may be ratified within 30 days by the
concurrence in writing of a majority of the state members and the
concurrence in writing of a majority of the members representing the
United States.

**Article VII**

**Finances**


                                             
 A. The commission shall submit to the governor or designated officer
of each party state a request for funds to cover estimated expenditures
for such period as may be required by the laws of that jurisdiction for
presentation to the legislature of such state. Any such request shall
indicate the sum or sums which the commission has requested or intends
to request be appropriated by the United States for the use or support
of the commission during the period covered by such sums.
                                             
 B. With due regard for such monies and other assistance as may be
made available to it, the commission shall be provided with such funds
by each of the several states participating in the compact to provide
the means of establishing and maintaining facilities, a staff of
personnel, and such activities as may be necessary to fulfill the powers
and duties imposed upon and entrusted to the commission.
                                             
 With due allowance for monies otherwise available, each budget of
the commission shall be the responsibility of the party states, to be
apportioned among them on a weighted formula based 50 percent on
population and 50 percent on gross land area, such population and gross
land area to be determined in accordance with the last official United
States Census of Population, but provided that the total contributions
of all of the states shall not be required to exceed 
                                             $50,000 annually
and provided further that regardless of the number of states party to
the compact at any time the maximum annual contribution required of any
state shall not exceed its share of the 
                                             $50,000 as determined above.
Any state may contribute such funds in excess of its share, as
determined above, as it may desire.
                                             
 C. The commission shall not pledge the credit of any jurisdiction.
The commission may meet any of its obligations in whole or in part with
funds available to it under Article VIII(E) of this compact, provided
that the commission takes specific action setting aside such funds prior
to the incurring of any obligation to be met in whole or in part in such
manner.
                                             
 D. The members of the commission shall be paid by the commission
their actual expenses incurred and incident to the performance of their
duties, subject to the approval of the commission.
                                             
 E. The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and
disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the commission shall be
subject to the audit and accounting procedures established under its
bylaws. However, all receipts and disbursements of funds handled by the
commission shall be audited by a qualified public accountant and the
report of the audit shall be included in and become a part of the annual
report of the commission.
                                             
 F. The accounts of the commission shall be open at any reasonable
time for inspection by such agency, representative, or representatives
of the jurisdictions which appropriate funds to the commission.

**Article VIII**

**Administration and Management**


                                             
 A. The commission may sue and be sued, and shall have a seal.
                                             
 B. The commission shall elect annually, from among its members, a
chairman, vice-chairman and treasurer. The commission shall appoint an
executive director who shall also act as secretary, and together with
the treasurer, shall be bonded in such amounts as the commission may
require.
                                             
 C. The commission shall appoint and remove or discharge such
personnel as may be necessary for the performance of its functions
irrespective of any civil service laws which might otherwise apply. The
commission shall establish and maintain, independently, by contract or
agreement with the United States or an agency thereof, or in conjunction
with any one or more of the party states, suitable retirement programs
for its employees. Employees of the commission shall be eligible for
social security coverage in respect to old age and survivors insurance,
provided that the commission takes such steps as may be necessary
pursuant to federal law to participate in such program of insurance as a
governmental agency or unit. The commission may establish and maintain
or participate in such additional programs of employee benefits as may
be appropriate to afford employees of the commission terms and
conditions of employment similar to those enjoyed by employees of the
party states generally.
                                             
 D. The commission may borrow, accept or contract for the services of
personnel from any state or the United States or any subdivision or
agency of any state or the United States, from any intergovernmental
agency, or from any institution, person, firm or corporation.
                                             
 E. The commission may accept for any of its purposes and functions
under this compact any and all appropriations, donations, and grants of
money, equipment, supplies, materials and services, conditional or
otherwise, from any state or the United States or any subdivision or
agency of any state or the United States, or intergovernmental agency,
or any institution, person, firm or corporation, and may receive,
utilize and dispose of the same.
                                             
 F. The commission may establish and maintain such facilities as may
be necessary for the transacting of its business. The commission may
accept, hold, and convey real and personal property and any interest
therein.
                                             
 G. The commission may adopt, amend, and rescind bylaws, rules and
regulations for the conduct of its business.
                                             
 H. The commission shall make and transmit annually, to the
legislature and governor of each party state, and to the President and
Congress of the United States, a report covering the activities of the
commission for the preceding year, and embodying such recommendations as
may have been adopted by the commission. The commission may issue such
additional reports as it may deem desirable.

**Article IX**

**Other Compacts and Activities**


                                             
 Nothing in this compact shall be construed to impair, or otherwise
affect, the jurisdiction of any interstate agency in which any party
state participates nor to abridge, impair, or otherwise affect the
provisions of any compact to which any one or more of the party states
may be a party, nor to supersede, diminish, or otherwise affect any
obligation assumed under any such compact. Nor shall anything in this
compact be construed to discourage additional interstate compacts among
some or all of the party states for the management of natural resources,
or the coordination of activities with respect to a specific natural
resource or any aspect of natural resource management, or for the
establishment of intergovernmental planning agencies in sub-areas of the
region. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to limit the
jurisdiction or activities of any participating government, agency, or
officer thereof or any private person or agency.

**Article X**

**Enactment**


                                             
 A. This compact shall become effective when entered into and enacted
into law by any 3 of the states of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont, and when the United States has
provided by law for the designation of its representation on the
commission. Thereafter it shall become effective with respect to any
other aforementioned state upon its enacting this compact into law.
                                             
 B. Upon consent of the Congress of the United States of America, any
other state in the northeastern area may become a party to this compact,
by entering into and enacting this compact into law.

**Article XI**

**Withdrawal**


                                             
 This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each
party state until renounced by it. Renunciation of this compact must be
preceded by sending 3 years' notice in writing of intention to withdraw
from the compact to the governor of each of the other states party to
this compact and to such officers or agencies of the United States as
may be designated by federal law.

**Article XII**

**Construction and Severability**


                                             
 The provisions of this compact shall be severable and if any phrase,
clause, sentence or provision of this compact is declared to be
unconstitutional or the applicability thereof, to any state, agency,
person, or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of the
remainder of this compact and the applicability thereof to any other
state, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. It
is the legislative intent that the provisions of this compact be
reasonably and liberally construed.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:14

 **484:14 Procedure. â€“** When the governor shall have executed said
compact on behalf of this state and shall have caused a verified copy to
be filed with the secretary of state and when said compact shall have
been ratified by 2 or more of the states named in RSA 484:13, then said
compact shall become operative and effective as between this state and
such other states. The governor is authorized and directed to take such
action as may be necessary to complete the exchange of official
documents as between this state and any other states ratifying said
compact and to take such steps as may be necessary to secure the
designation by the Congress of the United States of its representation
on the commission.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:15

 **484:15 Commissioner. â€“** After the aforesaid compact shall become
effective and operative as previously provided, the governor, with the
advice and consent of the council, shall designate or appoint a person
to serve as a member of the Northeastern Resources Commission. Said
commissioner shall serve for a term of 4 years. Any vacancy in said
office shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:16

 **484:16 Compensation. â€“** The commissioner shall not be entitled to
salary as such commissioner, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses
incurred in the performance of his duties as such commissioner.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Water Pollution Control Compact
-------------------------------

### Section 484:17

 **484:17 Ratification. â€“** The state department of environmental
services is authorized to enter into a compact with any one or more of
the states of Maine, Vermont, Rhode Island, Connecticut and New York and
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as follows:

**New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Compact**


                                             
 *Whereas*, The growth of population and the development of the
territory of the New England states has resulted in serious pollution of
certain interstate streams, ponds and lakes, and of tidal waters ebbing
and flowing past the boundaries of 2 or more states; and
                                             
 *Whereas*, Such pollution constitutes a menace to the health,
welfare and economic prosperity of the people living in such areas; and
                                             
 *Whereas*, The abatement of existing pollution and the control of
future pollution in the interstate waters of the New England area are of
prime importance to the people and can best be accomplished through the
cooperation of the New England states in the establishment of an
interstate agency to work with the states in the field of pollution
abatement;
                                             
 Now, therefore, the states of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont do agree and are bound as follows:
                                             
 Article I. It is agreed between the signatory states that the
provisions of this compact shall apply to streams, ponds and lakes which
are contiguous to 2 or more signatory states or which flow through 2 or
more signatory states or which have a tributary contiguous to 2 or more
signatory states or flowing through 2 or more signatory states, and also
shall apply to tidal waters ebbing and flowing past the boundaries of 2
states.
                                             
 Article II. There is created the New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Commission (referred to in this compact as the
commission) which shall be a body corporate and politic having the
powers, duties and jurisdiction enumerated in this compact and such
other and additional powers as shall be conferred upon it by the act or
acts of a signatory state concurred in by the others.
                                             
 Article III. The commission shall consist of 5 commissioners from
each signatory state, each of whom shall be a resident voter of the
state from which he is appointed. The commissioners shall be chosen in
the manner and for the terms provided by law of the state from which
they shall be appointed. For each state there shall be on the commission
a member representing the state health department, a member representing
the state water pollution control board (if such exists), and, except
where a state in its enabling legislation decides that the best
interests of the state will be otherwise served, a member representing
municipal interests, a member representing industrial interests, and a
member representing an agency acting for fisheries or conservation.
                                             
 Article IV. The commission shall annually elect from its members a
chairman and vice chairman and shall appoint and at its pleasure remove
or discharge such officers. It may appoint and employ a secretary who
shall be a professional engineer versed in water pollution and may
employ such stenographic or clerical employees as shall be necessary,
and at its pleasure remove or discharge such employees. It shall adopt a
seal and suitable bylaws and shall adopt rules and regulations for its
management and control. It may maintain an office for the transaction of
its business and may meet at any time or place within the signatory
states. Meetings shall be held at least twice each year. A majority of
the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business,
but no action of the commission imposing any obligation on any signatory
state or on any municipal agency or subdivision thereof or on any
person, firm or corporation therein shall be binding unless a majority
of the members from such signatory state shall have voted in favor of
such action. Where meetings are planned to discuss matters relevant to
problems of water pollution control affecting only certain of the
signatory states, the commission may vote to authorize special meetings
of the commissioners of the states especially concerned. The commission
shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and disbursements and shall
make an annual report to the governor and the legislature of each
signatory state setting forth in detail the operations and transactions
conducted by it pursuant to this compact, and shall make recommendations
for any legislative action deemed by it advisable, including amendments
to the statutes of the signatory states which may be necessary to
implement the intent and purpose of this compact. The commission shall
not incur any obligations for salaries, office, administrative,
traveling or other expenses prior to the allotment of funds by the
signatory states adequate to meet the same, nor shall the commission
pledge the credit of any of the signatory states. Each signatory state
reserves the right to provide hereafter by law for the examination and
audit of the accounts of the commission. The commission shall appoint a
treasurer who may be a member of the commission, and disbursements by
the commission shall be valid only when authorized by the commission and
when vouchers therefor have been signed by the secretary and
countersigned by the treasurer. The secretary shall be custodian of the
records of the commission with authority to attest to and certify such
records or copies of such records.
                                             
 Article V. It is recognized, owing to such variable factors as
location, size, character and flow and the many varied uses of the
waters subject to the terms of this compact, that no single standard of
sewage and waste treatment and no single standard of quality of
receiving waters is practical and that the degree of treatment of sewage
and industrial wastes should take into account the classification of the
receiving waters according to present and proposed highest use, such as
for drinking water supply, industrial and agricultural uses, bathing and
other recreational purposes, maintenance and propagation of fish life,
shellfish culture, navigation and disposal of wastes.
                                             
 The commission shall establish reasonable physical, chemical and
bacteriological standards of water quality satisfactory for various
classifications of use. It is agreed that each of the signatory states
through appropriate agencies will prepare a classification of its
interstate waters in entirety or by portions according to present and
proposed highest use and for this purpose technical experts employed by
state departments of health and state water pollution control agencies
are authorized to confer on questions relating to classification of
interstate waters affecting 2 or more states. Each signatory state
agrees to submit its classification of its interstate waters to the
commission for approval. It is agreed that after such approval, all
signatory states through their appropriate state health departments and
water pollution control agencies will work to establish programs of
treatment of sewage and industrial wastes which will meet standards
established by the commission for classified waters. The commission may
from time to time make such changes in definitions of classifications
and in standards as may be required by changed conditions or as may be
necessary for uniformity.
                                             
 Article VI. Each of the signatory states pledges to provide for the
abatement of existing pollution and for the control of future pollution
of interstate inland and tidal waters as described in Article I, and to
put and maintain the waters thereof in a satisfactory condition
consistent with the highest classified use of each body of water.
                                             
 Article VII. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to repeal or
prevent the enactment of any legislation or prevent the enforcement of
any requirement by any signatory state imposing any additional condition
or restriction to further lessen the pollution of waters within its
jurisdiction. Nothing contained in this compact shall affect or abate
any action now pending brought by any governmental board or body created
by or existing under any of the signatory states.
                                             
 Article VIII. The signatory states agree to appropriate for the
salaries, office, administrative, travel and other expenses such sum or
sums as shall be recommended by the commission. The commonwealth of
Massachusetts obligates itself only to the extent of 
                                             $6,500 in any one
year, the state of Connecticut only to the extent of 
                                             $3,000 in any one
year, the state of Rhode Island only to the extent of 
                                             $1,500 in any one
year, and the states of New Hampshire, Maine, and Vermont each only to
the extent of 
                                             $1,000 in any one year.
                                             
 Article IX. Should any part of this compact be held to be contrary
to the constitution of any signatory state or of the United States, all
other parts of the compact shall continue to be in full force and
effect.
                                             
 Article X. The commission is authorized to discuss with appropriate
state agencies in New York state questions of pollution of waters which
flow into the New England area from New York state or vice versa and to
further the establishment of agreements on pollution abatement to
promote the interests of the New York and New England areas. Whenever
the commission by majority vote of the members of each signatory state
shall have given its approval and the state of New York shall have taken
the necessary action to do so, the state of New York shall be a party to
this compact for the purpose of controlling and abating the pollution of
waterways common to New York and the New England states signatory to
this compact, but excluding the waters under the jurisdiction of the
Interstate Sanitation Commission (New York, New Jersey and
Connecticut).
                                             
 Article XI. This compact shall become effective immediately upon the
adoption of the compact by any 2 contiguous states of New England but
only insofar as it applies to those states and upon approval by federal
law. Thereafter upon ratification by other contiguous states, it shall
also become effective as to those states.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:108, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 484:18

 **484:18 Procedure. â€“** Whenever the department shall have entered
into the compact substantially in the form set forth in RSA 484:17 with
the duly authorized agency of any of the states specified in said
section, it shall file a certified copy of such compact in the office of
the secretary of state and shall notify the governor of its action. Such
compact shall thereupon become effective and operative as between this
state and such other state or states, subject to the consent of the
Congress of the United States, which the governor shall take such steps
as may be necessary to obtain. The governor is authorized and requested,
upon receiving notice of the filing of the required copy of the compact
in the office of the secretary of state, to notify, forthwith the
governors of the specified states and the President of the United States
that the state on its part has ratified and executed said compact. The
original notice of ratification received from the governor or other duly
authorized official of any state joining in said compact shall be filed
with the official copy of said compact in the office of the secretary of
state, and such notice, if any as may be received from the President or
the Congress of the United States, signifying the consent of the
Congress to said compact, shall be filed in the same manner.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 484:19

 **484:19 Commissioners. â€“** The governor, with the consent of the
council, shall appoint 5 commissioners to the New England Interstate
Water Pollution Control Commission. These commissioners shall include
the commissioner of environmental services or his designee and 4 other
persons to be nominated by the commissioner of environmental services.
All commissioners, except the commissioner of environmental services,
shall serve 4-year terms. A vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1995, 310:182. 2000, 44:2, eff. June 6, 2000.

### Section 484:20

 **484:20 Compensation. â€“** Each commissioner designated or appointed
by the governor who, while such commissioner, holds no salaried state
office shall be paid by the state as compensation the sum of 
                                             $30 for
each day's service performed in connection with his duties as such
commissioner, but not to exceed 
                                             $600 in any fiscal year. All
commissioners shall be entitled to their actual expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties as such.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:21

 **484:21 Reports. â€“** The commissioners on the part of the state
shall obtain accurate accounts of all the commission's receipts and
disbursements and shall report to the governor and the commissioner of
administrative services annually on or before September 15, setting
forth in such detail as the commissioner of administrative services may
require the transactions of the commission for the fiscal year ending on
the preceding June 30. They shall include in such report recommendations
for any legislative action that the commission deems advisable,
including such amendments or additions to the laws of the state as may
be necessary or desirable to implement the intent and purposes of the
New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Compact among the states
joining in the compact.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission Standards for Sewage and Waste Treatment Plant Personnel
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 484:22

 **484:22 Control Commission. â€“** The New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Commission, established by RSA 484:17, and called the
commission in this subdivision, may develop standards for the training,
educational and experience requirements for operating personnel
necessary to the proper operation of sewage and other waste treatment
plants.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:23

 **484:23 Training of Personnel. â€“**
                                             
 I. The commission may administer programs of training and
certification for such personnel and may make classifications of such
personnel. Any certificate issued by the commission shall be accepted by
this state and all agencies and subdivisions of this state as conclusive
evidence that the holder has the training, education and experience
necessary for certification for the class of position or responsibility
described in such certificate. The department of environmental services,
may impose and administer any other requirements for certification
within any applicable provisions of law, but it shall not reexamine or
reinvestigate the applicant for a certificate with respect to training,
education, or experience qualifications.
                                             
 II. The commission shall keep a record of all certificates issued by
it, and in response to any inquiry concerning such a certificate, the
commission shall inform the inquirer concerning its issuance and
validity. The commission shall annul any certificate issued by it if the
commission finds that the certificate was obtained by misrepresentation
of any material fact relating to the education, training or experience
of the applicant. Such annulment shall be pursuant to rules and
regulations of the commission, which shall afford due notice to the
certificate holder and an opportunity to present relevant evidence for
consideration by the commission.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:67, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 484:24

 **484:24 Application. â€“** Nothing contained in this subdivision
shall limit or abridge the authority of the commission to revise its
standards and to issue new or additional certificates. In any such case,
the department may require an applicant for a certificate to present a
certificate or certificates which evidence training, education and
experience meeting the current standards of the commission.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 484:25

 **484:25 Limitations. â€“**
                                             
 I. Certificates issued by the commission shall be recognized and
given in connection with personnel employed in or having
responsibilities for plants discharging into any waters of this state.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to require any
person to have a certificate in order to be employed in the operation of
a sewage or other waste treatment plant. Such requirements, if any,
shall be as set forth in or pursuant to other laws of this state;
provided that in any case where a certificate is required, an
appropriate certificate issued by the commission shall be accepted in
lieu of any certificate otherwise required.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 484:26

 **484:26 Application. â€“** To the extent that the authority conferred
upon the commission by this subdivision is not otherwise exercisable by
the commission under the provisions of the New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Compact, the commission shall not require the
financial or other support of the program or programs authorized by this
subdivision by any state not having enacted legislation substantially
similar to this subdivision.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
