---
title: 'CHAPTER 485-C GROUNDWATER PROTECTION ACT'
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 485-C
                                             
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION ACT
--------------------------

### Section 485-C:1

 **485-C:1 Statement of Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the natural quality of
the groundwater resource of the state by assisting local groundwater
protection efforts and by establishing procedures and standards for the
classification and remediation of groundwater and state permitting of
large groundwater withdrawals. The legislature recognizes the
fundamental importance of the groundwater resource and the role of local
planning and management in groundwater protection, and intends through
this legislation to provide a framework for local groundwater
protection. The legislature also intends to provide for consistent,
protective management and remediation of groundwater affected by
regulated contaminants. The natural quality of the groundwater resource
shall be preserved and protected in order that groundwater may be used
for drinking water supply. Ambient groundwater quality standards shall
meet drinking water standards, and the classification of groundwater
shall provide opportunity for protecting groundwater of high value as a
drinking water supply. The legislature recognizes that groundwater
constitutes an integral part of the hydrologic cycle and that the
protection of groundwater quality is necessary to preserve the integrity
of surface water.
                                             
 II. The legislature finds that the most effective means of
preserving the existing high quality of groundwater is by identification
and careful management of operations or activities which may cause
contamination of groundwater if not properly conducted. Because
groundwater is primarily a local resource, cities and towns should have
the first opportunity to institute programs for groundwater protection
within the scope of this chapter. Suppliers of water should also have
this opportunity because of their vital interest in preserving the
quality of their groundwater supply. The state, which has general
responsibility for groundwater management in the public trust and
interest, should develop groundwater protection programs within the
scope of this chapter when such programs are not developed by a local
entity.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 266:1. 2010, 348:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 485-C:2

 **485-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Ambient groundwater quality standards'' means maximum
concentration levels for regulated contaminants in groundwater which
result from human operations or activities, as delineated in RSA
485-C:6.
                                             
 II. "Best management practice'' means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the risk of contamination of
groundwater.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Contributing area'' means the land above a class of
groundwater, which is the vertical projection of the defined class on
the land surface.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 VI. "Director'' means the director of the division of water supply
and pollution control, department of environmental services.
                                             
 VII. "Division'' means the division of water supply and pollution
control, department of environmental services.
                                             
 VIII. "Groundwater'' means subsurface water that occurs beneath the
water table in soils and geologic formations.
                                             
 IX. "Groundwater discharge permit'' means a permit issued under RSA
485-A:13 for disposal of sewage or waste to the groundwater.
                                             
 IX-a. "Large groundwater withdrawal'' means any withdrawal from
groundwater of 57,600 gallons or more of water in any 24-hour period at
a single property or place of business except withdrawals associated
with short-term use.
                                             
 X. "Local entity'' means a town or city, acting through a planning
board, conservation commission, water department, health officer, or
other duly constituted municipal unit; a village district established
under RSA 52 or its predecessor statutes; an entity established by
intergovernmental agreement under RSA 53-A; or a supplier of water for
wellhead protection areas tributary to wells owned by the public water
system.
                                             
 XI. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, company, public or
private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the state,
department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, or any other
legal entity.
                                             
 XII. "Public water system'' means a public water system as defined
in RSA 485:1-a, XV.
                                             
 XIII. "Regulated contaminant'' means any physical, chemical,
biological, radiological substance or other matter, other than naturally
occurring substances at naturally occurring levels, in water which
adversely affects human health or the environment.
                                             
 XIII-a. "Replacement well'' means a new well installed to replace or
back-up an existing well that operates and impacts water users and water
resources in substantially the same manner as the well that is being
replaced.
                                             
 XIII-b. "Short-term use'' means the temporary, non-routine
withdrawal of groundwater at a specific geographical location over a
period of one year or less, and withdrawal of groundwater for
contaminated site remediation where the duration of the withdrawal may
exceed one year and corresponds with the objectives of the remediation.
                                             
 XIV. "Stratified drift aquifer'' means a geologic formation of
predominantly well-sorted sediment deposited by or in bodies of glacial
meltwater, including gravel, sand, silt, or clay, which contains
sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities
of water to wells.
                                             
 XV. "Supplier of water'' means a supplier of water as defined in RSA
485:1-a, XVI.
                                             
 XVI. "Transmissivity'' means the rate at which water is transmitted
through a unit width of a water-bearing formation under a unit hydraulic
gradient. It is equal to the hydraulic conductivity times the thickness
of the formation, and is given in units of distance squared per unit
time.
                                             
 XVI-a. "Water balance'' means the difference between the system
input volume and authorized metered consumption. System input volume
means the volume of water input to the water supply system corrected for
known errors, which is equal to the volume of water derived from the
water system's own sources, minus water consumed by treatment processes,
plus water imported or purchased, plus or minus the net change in water
storage where applicable. Authorized metered consumption means billed
metered water plus unbilled metered water. Billed metered water means
authorized consumption by all customer types that is both metered and
billed. Unbilled metered water means any authorized consumption that is
metered but for which the water supplier does not bill.
                                             
 XVII. "Well'' means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth to observe,
sample, or withdraw groundwater.
                                             
 XVIII. "Wellhead protection area'' means the surface and subsurface
area surrounding a water well or wellfield, supplying a public water
system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward
and reach such water well or wellfield.
                                             
 XIX. "Zone of contribution'' means the subsurface volume from which
groundwater flow is drawn to a pumping well.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 2006, 322:1. 2007, 55:1. 2010, 348:3, 4, eff.
Sept. 18, 2010. 2014, 304:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 485-C:3

 **485-C:3 Duties of the Department. –** The department shall:
                                             
 I. Maintain a statewide map identifying the classes of groundwater.
                                             
 II. Assist local and regional entities in the development and
administration of local wellhead protection programs, including
delineation of wellhead protection areas and the inventory and
management of activities which have a potential effect on groundwater
quality.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. Maintain an inventory of wells serving public water supply
systems, and establish a priority system for delineation of wellhead
protection areas and reclassification of these areas to class GAA.
                                             
 V. Provide for the investigation, management, and remediation of
contaminated groundwater.
                                             
 VI. Manage and preserve the state's groundwater on behalf of the
citizens of the state, recognizing that any private use of groundwater
and other public waters shall be reasonable in light of the protected
interests of the general public in the use and enjoyment of groundwater
and other public waters by ensuring that no unmitigated adverse impact,
as defined in this chapter, occurs.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:106; 266:2. 2003, 319:9. 2004,
257:44. 2006, 322:2. 2011, 224:117, II, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 485-C:4

 **485-C:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Criteria and procedures for delineating classes of groundwater.
                                             
 II. Criteria and procedures for reclassifying groundwater under RSA
485-C:9, II.
                                             
 III. Ambient groundwater quality standards as provided under RSA
485-C:6.
                                             
 IV. Criteria and procedures for conducting and maintaining
inventories of potential contamination sources and managing potential
contamination sources under RSA 485-C:8.
                                             
 V. Criteria and procedures for the issuance of groundwater release
detection permits as provided under RSA 485-C:13.
                                             
 VI. Fees for groundwater release detection permits required under
RSA 485-C:13.
                                             
 VII. Best management practices as provided under RSA 485-C:11,
except those practices for agricultural operations and pesticide use,
and rulemaking relative to such practices, shall be developed,
administered and enforced by the New Hampshire department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 VIII. Criteria and procedures for the investigation, management, and
remediation of contaminated groundwater, including the creation of
regulated zones of contaminated groundwater and the issuance of permits
or similar procedures for the remediation of such zones.
                                             
 IX. Criteria and procedures for the notification of owners of
affected properties and for the recordation of permits governing
groundwater management zones designated by the department in the
registry of deeds for affected properties.
                                             
 X. Criteria and procedures for the imposition of groundwater use
restrictions relative to groundwater management zones.
                                             
 XI. Criteria and procedures for accepting adopted municipal land use
controls in lieu of recordation requirements.
                                             
 XII. All new groundwater withdrawals of 57,600 gallons or more in
any 24-hour period. Such rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) Criteria and procedures for requiring persons to identify and
address impacts of withdrawals on surface waters, subsurface waters,
water-related natural resources, and public, private, residential, and
farm wells within the potential impact area of the proposed withdrawal
as defined in RSA 485-C:21, V-e.
                                             
 (b) Requirements relative to conservation management plans which
demonstrate the need for the proposed withdrawals, to be submitted by
the persons seeking approval for a withdrawal.
                                             
 (c) Procedures by which the department may deny permission for
withdrawals or order the applicant to provide a response policy, as
provided by department rules, for provision of alternative water supply
at no initial capital cost to persons whose wells are adversely affected
by the proposed withdrawal or order reduced withdrawals if hydrogeologic
data indicate that water-related resources are being adversely affected
by the withdrawals.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1995, 130:4. 1996, 228:110; 266:12. 1998,
124:2. 2006, 322:3, eff. Aug. 21, 2006.

### Section 485-C:5

 **485-C:5 Classes of Groundwater. –**
                                             
 I. All groundwater shall be classified for the purpose of
prescribing protections and management practices. These classifications
do not necessarily reflect existing water quality. For purposes of
classification, all groundwater shall be assigned to one of 4 classes as
follows:
                                             
 (a) Class GAA groundwater shall be the most protected class.
Groundwater in this class is within the wellhead protection area for
wells which presently are used or well sites which have been identified
for future use as drinking water supply for public water systems. An
inventory of potential contamination sources in the wellhead protection
area shall be conducted, and a management program shall be implemented
as provided under RSA 485-C:8.
                                             
 (b) Class GA1 shall be assigned to groundwater in a defined zone
of high value for present or future drinking water supply. An inventory
of potential contamination sources in the contributing area of this
class shall be conducted, and a management program shall be implemented
as provided under RSA 485-C:8.
                                             
 (c) Class GA2 shall be assigned to groundwater within aquifers
identified as highly productive for potential use as a public water
supply by the U.S. Geological Survey regional groundwater studies, or
other regional studies. Zones of stratified drift with a saturated
thickness greater than 20 feet, and a transmissivity greater than 1,000
feet squared per day shall be designated as class GA2. Zones of bedrock
with average well yields greater than 50 gallons per minute shall also
be designated as class GA2.
                                             
 (d) Class GB shall be assigned to all groundwater not assigned to
a higher class.
                                             
 II. The land area vertically above shall be assigned to the highest
class of groundwater beneath it, for purposes of managing potential
contamination sources.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1, eff. June 28, 1991.

### Section 485-C:6

 **485-C:6 Ambient Groundwater Quality Standards. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall establish and adopt ambient groundwater
quality standards for regulated contaminants which adversely affect
human health or the environment. Ambient groundwater standards shall
apply to all regulated contaminants which result from human operations
or activities, but do not apply to naturally occurring contaminants.
Where federal maximum contaminant level or health advisories have been
promulgated under the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act or rules relevant
to such act, ambient groundwater quality standards shall be equivalent
to such standards. Where such standards are based upon cancer risks, the
ambient groundwater quality standards shall be equivalent to that
exposure which causes a lifetime exposure risk of one cancer in
1,000,000 exposed population. Where no federal maximum contaminant level
or health advisory has been issued, the commissioner may adopt ambient
groundwater quality standards on a basis which provides for an adequate
margin of safety to protect human health and safety.
                                             
 II. Ambient groundwater quality standards shall be the water quality
basis for issuance of groundwater discharge permits under RSA 485-A:13.
                                             
 III. Except for discharges of domestic wastewater regulated under
RSA 485-A:13 and RSA 485-A:29, no person shall violate ambient
groundwater quality standards.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:110, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:6-a

 **485-C:6-a Groundwater Management Zones. –** The department may
designate groundwater management zones as a component of the remediation
of contaminated groundwater. The department shall issue permits or other
similar controls for such zones that establish a time period and process
for the remediation of the groundwater.

**Source.** 1996, 266:13, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 485-C:6-b

 **485-C:6-b Recordation of Groundwater Management Zone Permits. –**
The department shall require a person to whom a groundwater management
zone permit is issued to record notice of the existence of the
groundwater management zone in a form approved by the department. Such
notice shall be recorded in the registry of deeds in the chain of title
for each property included in whole or part within the groundwater
management zone. If the department approves the use of municipal land
use controls as an alternative form of notice, such recordation shall
not be required.

**Source.** 1996, 266:13, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 485-C:7

 **485-C:7 Potential Contamination Sources. –**
                                             
 I. Human activities or operations upon the land surface shall be
considered potential contamination sources if the activity or operation
poses a reasonable risk that regulated contaminants may be introduced
into the environment in such quantities as to degrade the natural
groundwater quality.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this chapter, potential contamination sources
shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) Vehicle service and repair shops, including but not limited
to: automobile, truck, and equipment service or repair shops, autobody
shops; and aircraft fueling, deicing, and maintenance areas.
                                             
 (b) General service and repair shops, including but not limited
to: furniture stripping, painting, and refinishing; photographic
processing; printing; appliance and small engine repair; boat repair,
service, and refinishing; refrigeration, heating, ventilating and air
conditioning shops.
                                             
 (c) Metalworking shops, including, but not limited to: machine
shops; metal plating, heat treating, smelting and jewelry making shops.
                                             
 (d) Manufacturing facilities, including, but not limited to:
electronics and chemical manufacturing, processing, and reclamation;
paper, leather, plastic, fiberglass, rubber, silicon and glass making; a
pharmaceutical production; pesticide manufacture; and chemical
preservation of wood and wood products.
                                             
 (e) Underground and aboveground storage facilities for oil and
hazardous substances, as defined in RSA 146-C.
                                             
 (f) Waste and scrap processing and storage, including, but not
limited to: junkyards, scrap yards, and auto salvage yards; wastewater
treatment plants; dumps, landfills, transfer stations and other solid
waste facilities; and wastewater or septage lagoons.
                                             
 (g) Transportation corridors, including, but not limited to,
highways and railroads.
                                             
 (h) Septic systems, including, but not limited to large septic
systems which require a groundwater discharge permit under RSA
485-A:13.
                                             
 (i) Laboratories and professional offices, including but not
limited to: medical, dental, and veterinary offices; and research and
analytical laboratories.
                                             
 (j) Use of agricultural chemicals, including but not limited to:
golf courses; feed lots, kennels, piggeries, and manure stockpiles;
parks; nurseries and sod farms; and the usage of registered pesticides.
                                             
 (k) Salt storage and use for winter road and parking lot
maintenance.
                                             
 (l) Snow dumps.
                                             
 (m) Stormwater infiltration ponds or leaching catch basins.
                                             
 (n) Cleaning services, including but not limited to: dry
cleaners, laundromats; beauty salons; and car washes.
                                             
 (o) Food processing plants, including but not limited to: meat
packing and slaughterhouses; dairies; and processed food manufacture.
                                             
 (p) Fueling and maintenance of excavation and earthmoving
equipment.
                                             
 (q) Concrete, asphalt and tar manufacture.
                                             
 (r) Cemeteries.
                                             
 (s) Hazardous waste facilities regulated under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, as implemented by RSA 147-A.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1, eff. June 28, 1991.

### Section 485-C:8

 **485-C:8 Inventory and Management. –**
                                             
 I. Inventory and management under this section shall be performed in
GAA or GA1 contributing areas by the department or, by the local entity
requesting reclassification under RSA 485-C:9, II(a) or III(a).
                                             
 II. The inventory of potential contamination sources required in
contributing areas designated as class GAA or GA1 shall include the site
address, tax map and lot number, property owner name and address, and
operator name and address for all potential contamination sources within
the contributing area of a designated class. The inventory shall include
estimates of the type and quantities of regulated substances used in the
activity or generated as waste materials. The inventory shall be based
on physical site inspections of the potential contamination sources
within the designated class area.
                                             
 III. Potential contamination sources in class GAA and GA1
contributing areas shall be managed by:
                                             
 (a) Updating the inventory at intervals not to exceed 3 years.
                                             
 (b) Notifying the owner of each potential contamination source by
letter at intervals not to exceed 3 years that the activity is being
conducted within a contributing area of a class of groundwater
designated for high protection because of its value for drinking water
supply. The notice shall state that such activities shall be subject to
best management practices, and shall provide information concerning
where copies of applicable best management practices may be obtained.
                                             
 (c) Performing an inspection at least once every 3 years of all
potential contamination sources located within the contributing area to
ascertain compliance with best management practices provided, however,
that the following shall not be subject to inspection under this
chapter:
                                             
 (1) Pesticides which are regulated under RSA 430:28-48; and
                                             
 (2) Agricultural operations which are operated in compliance
with all applicable chapters of RSA title XL and best management
practices developed, administered and enforced by the New Hampshire
department of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 (d) Enforcing rules for best management practices adopted under
RSA 485-C:11.
                                             
 IV. The authority granted to local entities and other agencies under
this chapter shall not be interpreted to extend to RSA 430:28-48.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1995, 130:4. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:9

 **485-C:9 Procedures for Classification and Reclassification. –**
                                             
 I. Within 180 days of June 28, 1991, the commissioner shall assign
all groundwater within the state to class GB or class GA2.
                                             
 II. Procedures for Reclassification to Class GAA.
                                             
 (a) A local entity may request reclassification of a wellhead
protection area to class GAA by submitting a written request to the
department which includes a wellhead protection area delineation, a
potential contamination source inventory, and a potential contamination
source management program to be implemented by the local entity. When a
local entity is a town or a city, the local governing body, as defined
in RSA 672:6, shall concur in writing with the request for
reclassification.
                                             
 (b) The department may, on its own motion, propose
reclassification of an area to class GAA after delineation of the
wellhead protection area, inventory of potential contamination sources,
and establishment of a written management program to be implemented by
the department.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner shall review requests for reclassification
by local entities and proposals for reclassification prepared on the
department's own motion, and shall act upon such requests and proposals
pursuant to RSA 485-C:9, VI.
                                             
 III. Procedures for Reclassification to Class GA1.
                                             
 (a) A local entity may request reclassification of a zone of
groundwater to class GA1 by submitting a written request to the
department which includes a definition of the contributing area of the
proposed zone, a potential contamination source inventory, and a
potential contamination source management program, to be implemented by
the local entity. When the local entity is a town or a city, the local
governing body, as defined in RSA 672:6 shall concur in writing with the
request for reclassification.
                                             
 (b) The department may, on its own motion, propose
reclassification of groundwater to class GA1 for any groundwater
previously classified GA2, after definition of the contributing area,
inventory of potential contamination sources, and establishment of a
written management program to be implemented by the department.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner shall review requests for reclassification
by local entities and proposals for reclassification prepared on the
department's own motion, and shall act upon such requests and proposals
pursuant to RSA 485-C:9, VI.
                                             
 IV. Procedures for Reclassification to Class GA2. When the
department receives a report or study which identifies areas of bedrock
or stratified drift aquifers which are highly productive for public
water supply, the department shall review the report or study, and shall
recommend reclassification to class GA2 to the commissioner for all
areas which meet the criteria for this class, and are not currently
classified GA1 or GAA.
                                             
 V. Procedures for Reclassification to Class GB.
                                             
 (a) The department may, on receipt of a request, or on its own
motion, review any contributing area classified as GAA or GA1 to
determine if the requirements for inventory and management of potential
contamination sources are being met. If the department determines that
requirements are not being met, the department shall request correction
of deficiencies in writing to the responsible local entity. If
deficiencies are not corrected within 6 months, the department may
either assume inventory and management of the potential contamination
sources in the contributing area and correct the deficiencies, or
recommend reclassification to class GB or GA2 to the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) For a class GA2 area, the commissioner shall reclassify to
class GB if a review of regional groundwater studies shows that the
criteria of RSA 485-C:5, I(c) for the class are not met.
                                             
 VI. Procedures Applicable to All Reclassifications. The commissioner
shall reclassify groundwater when the commissioner determines that the
proposed reclassification meets all the requirements of this chapter and
rules adopted under this chapter. Prior to any such reclassification the
commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide written notice of the proposed reclassification and
public hearing to the town or city clerk of all affected municipalities
at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.
                                             
 (b) Provide written notice of the proposed reclassification and
public hearing to landholders of record within the contributing area at
least 30 days prior to the public hearing.
                                             
 (c) Hold a public hearing.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:86-89, 106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:10

 **485-C:10 Degraded Groundwater. –**
                                             
 I. Groundwater which has been degraded below ambient groundwater
quality standards by past operations, discharges, or other human
activities shall not be excluded from the designated class.
                                             
 II. Groundwater which does not meet ambient groundwater quality
standards due entirely to natural causes shall not be excluded from the
designated class.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1, eff. June 28, 1991.

### Section 485-C:11

 **485-C:11 Best Management Practices. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall develop best management practices for the
activities identified in RSA 485-C:7 as potential contamination sources,
except those activities under RSA 485-C:7, II(j) which shall be subject
to best management practices and the applicable provisions of RSA title
XL, developed, administered and enforced by the New Hampshire department
of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 II. Best management practices shall strike a reasonable balance
between environmental, energy, and economic impacts. These best
management practices shall apply to all potential contamination source
activities in the state. In developing best management practices for an
activity or type of activity over which another state agency has
regulatory jurisdiction, the department shall consult with that agency,
and may, through a memorandum of agreement, delegate to that agency the
administration of best management practices. Best management practices
shall not be inconsistent with applicable state or federal rules and
regulations concerning such activities or with the intent of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1995, 130:4. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:12

 **485-C:12 Prohibited Uses. –** Within any wellhead protection area
classified as GAA, the following new uses are prohibited:
                                             
 I. The siting or operation of a hazardous waste disposal facility as
defined under RSA 147-A.
                                             
 II. The siting or operation of a solid waste landfill.
                                             
 III. The outdoor storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals in
bulk.
                                             
 IV. The siting or operation of a junk or salvage yard.
                                             
 V. The siting or operation of a snow dump.
                                             
 VI. The siting or operation of a wastewater or septage lagoon.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1, eff. June 28, 1991.

### Section 485-C:13

 **485-C:13 Groundwater Release Detection Permit. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of a groundwater release detection permit shall be to
monitor groundwater for early detection of any impact to groundwater
quality.
                                             
 II. A groundwater release detection permit shall be required for the
following activities in all classes of groundwater:
                                             
 (a) The siting or operation of a hazardous waste disposal
facility as defined under RSA 147-A.
                                             
 (b) The siting or operation of a lined solid waste landfill.
                                             
 (c) The siting or operation of a lined wastewater lagoon.
                                             
 (d) The siting or operation of a facility for processing soils
contaminated with petroleum products.
                                             
 III. A groundwater release detection permit shall be required for
the following additional activities in a class GAA wellhead protection
area:
                                             
 (a) The siting or operation of a new solid waste composting or
solid waste resource recovery facility.
                                             
 (b) The operation of an existing activity which is listed in RSA
485-C:12 as a prohibited new use, unless such activity is required to
obtain a groundwater discharge permit under RSA 485-A:13.
                                             
 IV. The groundwater release detection permit:
                                             
 (a) Shall require compliance with all applicable state and local
laws and regulations;
                                             
 (b) Shall include periodic monitoring of on-site groundwater
quality to be performed by the permittee with reports to the
department;
                                             
 (c) May contain such other conditions as are reasonable and
consistent with the purpose of this chapter; and
                                             
 (d) Shall be issued for a fixed term of 5 years.
                                             
 V. Applications for groundwater release detection permits shall be
on forms provided by the department and shall contain such information
as the department shall require by rule.
                                             
 VI. Application for a groundwater release detection permit for an
existing facility or activity shall be made within 6 months of the date
of notification of reclassification to GAA, or when a permit is required
in any class, within 18 months of June 28, 1991. No person shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter if such person shall have made
application for a groundwater release detection permit for an existing
facility or activity which is made within the required period, and the
department has failed to grant or deny such permit.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:14

 **485-C:14 Notice to Municipality. –** Upon submission to the
department of an application for a permit necessary for an activity in a
contributing area classified as GA1 or GAA, which is a potential
contamination source under RSA 485-C:7, the state shall notify the local
governing body, as defined in RSA 672:6, as well as the local entity, if
known, of the filing of the application and shall suspend action on the
application for 30 days to allow time for receipt of recommendations
from the local entity. For any application required by law to be acted
upon within a certain prescribed time, the time shall be extended
automatically by 30 days to allow for comment. The department shall
proceed to act upon the application at the end of 30 days, even if no
comments have been received. If the local entity submits recommendations
to the department on the application, the department shall make written
findings explaining any deviation from such recommendations. This
section shall not apply to applications to construct domestic septic
systems, provided that the system has an aggregate capacity of less than
20,000 gallons per day on one lot.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1, eff. June 28, 1991.

### Section 485-C:14-a

 **485-C:14-a Notification of Large Groundwater Withdrawal Required.
–** Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, before any
person may withdraw 57,600 gallons or more of water in any 24-hour
period from a well, such person shall provide written notice to the
governing body of the municipality in which the well is located and to
the governing bodies of each municipality and each supplier of water
within the potential impact area of the proposed withdrawal as defined
in RSA 485-C:21, V-e. This section shall apply only to wells established
after the effective date of this section.

**Source.** 1998, 124:3. 2006, 322:4, eff. Aug. 21, 2006.

### Section 485-C:14-b

 **485-C:14-b Notification of Groundwater Contamination Required.
–**
                                             
 I. Upon the discovery of groundwater contamination where one or more
regulated chemical or radiological contaminants exceeds ambient
groundwater quality standards, the commissioner shall provide
notification of the presence of the contamination to the following:
                                             
 (a) The owners of all property which contains a water supply well
and is within 500 horizontal feet of the well where the contamination is
discovered.
                                             
 (b) Public water suppliers, when the groundwater contamination
falls within the wellhead protection area of the public water supply.
                                             
 (c) The health officer of any municipality which contains
property being notified.
                                             
 II. Notification shall be made in writing within 45 days after the
department receives analytical data indicating the presence of the
contamination. Each property owner or public water supplier shall be
notified at least once upon the discovery of contamination in an area.
The commissioner shall provide the notification and shall provide
additional notification as the extent of contamination at a site is
further determined and remediation occurs.

**Source.** 2004, 101:1, eff. May 17, 2004.

### Section 485-C:15

 **485-C:15 Investigation and Inspection. –** The department, any
authorized representative, any authorized representative of any agency
operating under a memorandum of agreement with the department, or any
town or city health officer may enter any land or establishment for the
purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, and shall at
reasonable times have access to any facility subject to this chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:16

 **485-C:16 Cease and Desist Orders. –**
                                             
 I. The department may issue a written cease and desist order against
any violation of this chapter or rule adopted under this chapter. Local
health officers shall have concurrent power to issue such orders. Such
orders shall set out the specific acts which are alleged to be in
violation, and the specific activities which are to be enjoined. Such
orders shall be effective immediately. Health officers shall provide
copies of such orders to the commissioner upon issuance. The
commissioner may take whatever action is deemed necessary to ensure
uniform state enforcement. Any person to whom an order is issued by a
local health officer may, within 15 days, request review of the order by
the department. The department shall review the order within 15 days of
receipt of the request for review. If the department fails to act on the
request for review, the order shall no longer be in effect. If the
department finds the order to have insufficient basis or to be no longer
necessary, it shall state that fact in writing, and the order shall no
longer be in effect.
                                             
 II. A written cease and desist order issued by the department under
paragraph I may be recorded by the department in the registry of deeds
for the county in which the property is situated and, on recordation,
such order shall run with the land; provided, however, that an
appropriate description of the land involved, including the accurate
name of the record owner, shall be incorporated in the cease and desist
order. No fee shall be charged for recording such an administrative
order; however, the fee for discharge of any such order shall be the
same as for the discharge of a lien on real property.
                                             
 III. No fine or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with
an order if such failure did not otherwise result in a violation of this
chapter or rules adopted under this chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:17

 **485-C:17 Appeals. –** Actions of the department under RSA 485-C:16
may be appealed in accordance with RSA 21-O:14.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:90, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485-C:18

 **485-C:18 Administrative Fines. –** The commissioner, after notice
and hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative fine not
to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates any
provision of this chapter or any rule, permit or order adopted or issued
under this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the
commissioner under this section shall be in accordance with RSA 541. Any
administrative fine imposed under this section shall not preclude the
imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The commissioner
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this section for violation of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of an
administrative fine.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 485-C:19

 **485-C:19 Penalties and Other Relief. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who knowingly violates this chapter, or any rule,
permit, or order adopted or issued under this chapter; or who knowingly
or recklessly makes any material false statement in any document
required to be filed or maintained pursuant to this chapter; or who
knowingly or recklessly renders inaccurate, falsifies, or tampers with
any monitoring device or method required under this chapter; or who
knowingly fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any lawful order of the
department, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, and a
felony if any other person. Such person shall also be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed 
                                             $25,000 for each violation or for each day of a
continuing violation.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates this chapter or a rule, permit, or order
adopted or issued under this chapter, shall be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed 
                                             $10,000 for each violation or for each day of a
continuing violation. Such violation may also be enjoined by the
superior court upon application of the attorney general.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996; 266:5, eff.
Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 485-C:20

 **485-C:20 Effect on Local Ordinances. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preempt the authority
of municipalities, under other statutes, to enact local ordinances or
regulations affecting groundwater, other than groundwater withdrawals;
provided, however, that requirements imposed under this chapter shall be
considered as minimum.
                                             
 II. No regulatory decision made by the department shall abrogate or
affect any applicant's obligation to comply with or obtain all
applicable and lawful local ordinances, codes, regulations, and
approvals not otherwise prohibited by this chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 344:1. 1998, 124:6. 2010, 348:2, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 485-C:21

 **485-C:21 Approval for Large Groundwater Withdrawals. –**
                                             
 I. No person may withdraw more than a total of 57,600 gallons of
water in any 24-hour period from a well or wells sited at a single
property or place of business after the effective date of this section,
regardless of the number of wells sited on the property or business,
without the prior approval of the department.
                                             
 II. Applications for approval of water withdrawals of 57,600 gallons
or more per day shall be filed with the department on a form approved by
the department. A preliminary report submitted by a public water system
pursuant to department rules shall be an application for purposes of
this section. Copies of the application and any subsequent materials
submitted to the department shall be forwarded by certified mail by the
applicant to the governing bodies of each municipality and each supplier
of water within the potential impact area of the proposed withdrawal as
defined in RSA 485-C:21, V-e. The department shall provide the governing
body of each municipality with copies of any mailed correspondence sent
to the applicant. The department shall provide the applicant with copies
of any mailed correspondence sent to or received from the governing body
of a municipality.
                                             
 III. Following the submission of the application, the department
shall hold a public hearing on the application in the municipality in
which the proposed withdrawal is to be made upon the request of the
governing body of any municipality or supplier of water within the
potential impact area, provided that such a hearing is requested within
15 days of receipt of the application.
                                             
 IV. The department shall hold the public hearing within 30 days
after the request of the governing body of the municipality or the
supplier of water made pursuant to paragraph III. Notice of the hearing
shall be made by the applicant and shall be published twice in 2
different weeks, the last publication to be 7 days before the hearing,
in one newspaper of general circulation throughout the state and another
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The notice shall
also be posted in 2 public places in the municipality.
                                             
 V. The applicant and the governing body of each municipality and
each supplier of water within the potential impact area of the well may
submit comments to the department relative to the proposed withdrawal
within 45 days after the public hearing in the municipality or, if no
hearing is requested, within 45 days after the receipt of the
application. If the comments relative to the application make
recommendations to the department, the department shall specifically
consider such recommendations and shall issue written findings with
respect to each issue raised that is contrary to the decision of the
department.
                                             
 V-a. Upon the request of the governing body of a municipality within
the potential impact area, the department shall hold a public hearing,
after receipt of the final report, and prior to a final decision. The
department shall notify the municipalities within 10 days of receiving
the final report. The municipalities shall have 15 days within which to
request a public hearing. Notice and response to hearing requests shall
be the same as that required under paragraph IV.
                                             
 V-b. The department's decision on the application shall be based on
a demonstrated need for the withdrawal after review of:
                                             
 (a) A description of the need.
                                             
 (b) A conservation management plan.
                                             
 (c) A conceptual hydrologic model of the withdrawal.
                                             
 (d) A water resource and use inventory.
                                             
 (e) The effects of the withdrawal on water resources and uses.
                                             
 (f) Completion of a withdrawal testing program.
                                             
 (g) Development of an impact monitoring and reporting program.
                                             
 (h) Identification of potential mitigation measures.
                                             
 V-c. In order to preserve the public trust, no large groundwater
withdrawal shall cause an unmitigated impact as determined by the
following:
                                             
 (a) Reducing the withdrawal capacity of a private water supply
well of a single residence as a result of the reduction of available
water that is directly associated with the withdrawal as determined by
the following:
                                             
 (1) Any reduction in capacity for wells with a capacity less
than water well board recommended optimum minimum flow capacity of 4
gallons per minute for 4 hours before the withdrawal;
                                             
 (2) Any reduction in capacity below 4 gallons per minute for 4
hours, for wells that had a capacity greater than 4 gallons per minute
for 4 hours, before the withdrawal; or
                                             
 (3) A reduction in capacity where the well still has a
capacity between 4 gallons and 10 gallons per minute for 4 hours and the
user provides information indicating that the reduction in flow has
resulted in the inability to meet his or her water needs;
                                             
 (b) Reducing the capacity of a public drinking water supply below
the minimum withdrawal rates required per consumer determined by the
following:
                                             
 (1) Minimum daily amounts of drinking water shall be
determined per use based on the design flow criteria established for
public water supply systems established in rules adopted by the
department; or
                                             
 (2) Where it is verified that such wells were unable to
produce the design flow before the withdrawal began, the adverse impact
shall be any reduction in the ability to produce water;
                                             
 (c) Reducing the capacity of a water supply that is used for a
multiple unit dwelling residence, but that is not a public water supply,
that results in the inability to continue established activities or
maintain existing water capacity requirements;
                                             
 (d) Reducing the capacity of a private, non-residential,
non-drinking water supply that results in the inability of a commercial,
industrial, agricultural, or retail facility to continue established
services or production volumes;
                                             
 (e) Reducing the ability of a registered water user to produce
volumes equivalent to the average daily withdrawal for a specific
calendar month as determined by discharge measurements and reports made
to the department in accordance with the water user requirements under
RSA 488 or other previous water use reporting requirements of the
department;
                                             
 (f) Reducing surface water levels or flows that will, or do,
cause a violation of surface water quality rules adopted by the
department;
                                             
 (g) Causing a net loss of values for submerged lands under tidal
and fresh waters and its wetlands as set forth in RSA 482-A;
                                             
 (h) Causing the inability of permitted surface water or
groundwater discharges to meet permit conditions;
                                             
 (i) Reducing river flows below acceptable levels established
pursuant to RSA 483;
                                             
 (j) Causing the contamination of groundwater obtained from wells
or surface waters from contaminated groundwater whose flow has been
altered by the withdrawal, or causing the contamination of an aquifer or
contributing to the spread of any existing contamination;
                                             
 (k) Causing the long-term predictable rate of replenishment of
the aquifer that is the source of the withdrawal to be exceeded.
                                             
 V-d. Terms and conditions of approval for a large groundwater
withdrawal may be altered by the department to accommodate for drought
conditions or new withdrawals.
                                             
 V-e. Applications for large groundwater withdrawals shall be
accompanied by an impact assessment of the potential impact area of the
proposed withdrawal to demonstrate the preservation of the public trust
as set forth in paragraph V-c. The impact assessment shall include at a
minimum the following:
                                             
 (a) The maximum extent of the cone of depression created by the
withdrawal with the assumption of a conceptual hydrological model
condition of 180 days of continuous pumping at maximum volumes without
recharge from rainfall or snowmelt;
                                             
 (b) The maximum extent of the recharge area for the withdrawal
with the assumption of a conceptual hydrologic model condition of 180
days of continuous pumping at maximum volumes without recharge from
rainfall or snowmelt; and
                                             
 (c) The downgradient area of the withdrawal which shall include:
                                             
 (1) An existing or new delineation of a potential impact area
large enough so that the size of the entire study area for the
withdrawal is at least 10 times the size of the recharge area for the
withdrawal;
                                             
 (2) An existing or new delineation of a watershed where the
amount of water crossing the downgradient boundary, that is, leaving the
study under current conditions, is at least 10 times the amount to be
withdrawn; or
                                             
 (3) An alternative method of estimating a potential impact
area provided it relies on conservative assumptions, is demonstrated as
appropriate for the site by test results, and is clearly explained and
justified.
                                             
 VI. (a) Decisions of the department may be appealed in accordance
with RSA 21-O:7, IV.
                                             
 (b) Any party shall have the right to appeal from the decision of
the water council to the superior court of the county in which the large
groundwater withdrawal is to be made to determine the validity and the
reasonableness of the department's action on the permit. The appeal
shall be filed within 60 days after the decision of the water council.
The appeal shall suspend the decision of the department pending the
outcome of a preliminary hearing. The appeal, so far as practicable,
shall have precedence over other actions in the same court.
                                             
 VII. Records of public hearings shall be available pursuant to RSA
91-A.
                                             
 VIII. Before the department issues a large groundwater withdrawal
permit, any municipality in which a well is sited or proposed to be
sited, or any municipality within the potential impact area of the
proposed withdrawal pursuant to paragraph V-e, may require the
department to determine that the withdrawal will not infringe on the
public's use of groundwater, including any contribution to wetlands and
surface waters, by ensuring that the requirements of paragraph V-c are
met. The department's determination shall be based on substantial
evidence and shall include the methods, evidence, and data it used to
support its judgment. No municipality shall be required to collect data
relative to a seasonal river overflow surface water stream, in order to
determine any long-term unmitigated impact and prevent irreversible
effects of the large groundwater withdrawal well, for more than 3 years
unless the department provides scientific justification for longer
monitoring as it relates to the effect of the groundwater withdrawal
only. After the department issues a large groundwater withdrawal permit,
such municipality may require the department to provide a written
finding describing the status of a decision issued by the department on
an application submitted under this section when a local building permit
directly related to a large groundwater withdrawal activity expires or
becomes null and void, or both. The department shall determine if the
change in status of such local permit affects the decision the
department made on the application.
                                             
 IX. The department shall allow any municipality showing that it may
be substantially and specifically affected by a proceeding under this
chapter to intervene as a party in the whole or any portion of the
proceeding and shall allow the municipality to participate by
presentation of argument orally or in writing or for any other purpose,
as the department may order. A municipality that intervenes before the
department shall retain its status through any appeal of the
department's decision.

**Source.** 1998, 124:4. 2005, 200:1-4. 2006, 322:5. 2007, 169:1. 2010,
158:1, eff. July 17, 2010. 2014, 304:2, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 485-C:21-a

 **485-C:21-a Conservation Management Plan Not Required. –** The
department may grant a renewable exemption from the rules for water
conservation practices under RSA 485:61 to any municipality with a water
balance of less than 15 percent. The municipality shall calculate the
water balance each calendar year after the well is permitted, and such
balance and all components defined in the balance shall be submitted to
the department no later than the first day of March following the year
to which the water balance pertains. The department shall not grant an
exemption to any municipality that fails to submit a water balance of
less than 15 percent by such date.

**Source.** 2014, 304:3, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 485-C:22

 **485-C:22 Exemptions for Large Groundwater Withdrawals From
Replacement Wells. –**
                                             
 I. Large groundwater withdrawals from new wells that replace a well
or wells installed prior to August 1, 1998 shall not be subject to the
requirements of RSA 485-C:14-a and RSA 485-C:21. Such wells shall
require approval of the department under RSA 485-C:22, III-IV.
                                             
 II. No person shall withdraw 57,600 gallons or more of groundwater
from a replacement well or wells over any 24-hour period without the
prior approval of the department.
                                             
 III. Before the department issues an approval for a large
groundwater withdrawal from a replacement well or wells, a person shall
submit an application to the department to demonstrate the withdrawal
from the replacement well or wells will operate and impact water users
and resources in substantially the same manner as the well or wells that
are being replaced.
                                             
 IV. Applications for approval of replacement wells shall be
submitted to the department and contain the following information:
                                             
 (a) Name and address of the well owner replacing the well or
wells.
                                             
 (b) Address and map identifying the location of the well or wells
being replaced and the location of the replacement well or wells.
                                             
 (c) Description of the well construction details of the well or
wells being replaced and new replacement or replacement wells
including:
                                             
 (1) Depth of well.
                                             
 (2) Length and diameter of well casing and screen.
                                             
 (3) Description of overburden and bedrock lithology of the
well or wells being replaced and the new replacement well or wells.
                                             
 (d) Hydrogeologic information that demonstrates that the effects
of the replacement well or wells on water users and water resources
identified by RSA 485-C:21, V-c will be substantially the same as the
well that is being replaced.

**Source.** 2007, 55:2, eff. July 21, 2007.

### Section 485-C:23

 **485-C:23 Temporary Exemptions for Large Groundwater Withdrawals
Required for Emergency Purposes. –**
                                             
 I. The department may approve a new large groundwater withdrawal
without compliance with RSA 485-C:14, RSA 485-C:21, or RSA 485-C:22 to
protect human health and the environment in the event that circumstances
beyond the control of the person requesting the withdrawal occurs, such
as fire, flood, drought, other acts of God, or infrastructure failure.
                                             
 II. A large groundwater withdrawal approved for emergency purposes
under paragraph I shall only be allowed to operate for 2 years unless it
is approved by the department in accordance with RSA 485-C:21.
                                             
 III. No withdrawal that the department approves in accordance with
paragraph I shall result in an unmitigated impact as described in RSA
485-C:21, V-c. The department shall require that monitoring and
mitigation plans be implemented when necessary to identify and mitigate
the occurrence of such impacts.
                                             
 IV. Any party may appeal from the decision of the department to
approve a withdrawal in accordance with paragraph I to the superior
court of the county in which the large groundwater withdrawal is to be
made to determine the validity and the reasonableness of the
department's action. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the
approval of the department.

**Source.** 2010, 348:5, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 485-C:24

 **485-C:24 Short-Term Use Groundwater Withdrawals. –** The
department shall require a short-term use, large groundwater withdrawal
to cease and desist if such withdrawal causes unmitigated impacts as
described in RSA 485-A:21, V-c.

**Source.** 2010, 348:5, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 485-C:25

 **485-C:25 Exemption for Certain Large Groundwater Withdrawals
Associated With Geothermal Processes. –** A geothermal system as defined
by RSA 485:1-a, I-b and RSA 485:1-a, XI-a shall not be considered a
large groundwater withdrawal if the volume of groundwater extracted
minus the volume of water returned to the same aquifer does not exceed
57,600 gallons over any 24-hour period.

**Source.** 2010, 348:5, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.
