---
title: 'CHAPTER 485-E SOUTHEAST WATERSHED ALLIANCE'
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 485-E
                                             
SOUTHEAST WATERSHED ALLIANCE
----------------------------

### Section 485-E:1

 **485-E:1 Findings and Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. New Hampshire's coastal water resources have significant
ecological, commercial, cultural, and recreational values for the state
and its citizens. The state's coastal water resources are highly
sensitive and are subject to intense and increasing pressures associated
with population growth and development, including increased pollution
loads from many sources, including wastewater treatment facilities,
stormwater runoff, septic systems, and land use practices. Excess levels
of nutrients are of particular concern, have become a significant
problem in the Great Bay estuary, and are likely to result in more
stringent water quality requirements that could affect activities
occurring in municipalities throughout the coastal watershed. In order
to improve and protect water quality and meet state and federal
regulations, it is necessary for municipalities to reduce nutrient
pollution loads from wastewater treatment facilities, stormwater runoff,
septic systems and septage, and land use practices. It is essential that
the state, and municipalities located within the state's coastal
watershed, work in a coordinated way to address these problems and
protect the health and sustainability of New Hampshire's coastal
resources.
                                             
 II. The purposes of this chapter are to:
                                             
 (a) Create better municipal, intermunicipal, and regional
planning and coordination relative to wastewater and stormwater
management, water quality and water supply planning, and land use;
                                             
 (b) Establish a regional framework for coastal watershed
communities, regional planning commissions, the state, and other
stakeholders to collaborate on planning and implementation measures to
improve and protect water quality and more effectively address the
challenges of meeting clean water standards, particularly with respect
to nutrients pollution;
                                             
 (c) Encourage coastal watershed municipalities, the state, and
other stakeholders, individually and in collaboration with one another,
to plan, implement, and invest in wastewater, stormwater, and land use
planning and management approaches that protect the water quality,
natural hydrology, and habitats of the state's coastal resources and
associated waters and that advance the state's economic growth, resource
protection, and planning policy, established in RSA 9-B; and
                                             
 (d) Seek innovative solutions to reducing pollution and enhancing
water quality.

**Source.** 2004, 258:1. 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:2

 **485-E:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Alliance'' means the Southeast Watershed Alliance.
                                             
 II. "Associated waters'' means freshwater surface waters and
groundwater located in the coastal watershed, which contribute flows
downstream to the state's coastal water resources.
                                             
 III. "Coastal watershed'' means the land area in New Hampshire
contributing groundwater, surface water, and stormwater to the state's
coastal water resources and associated waters. The coastal watershed
consists all or portions of the following municipalities: Barrington;
Brentwood; Brookfield; Candia; Chester; Danville; Deerfield; Dover;
Durham; East Kingston; Epping; Exeter; Farmington; Fremont; Greenland;
Hampton; Hampton Falls; Kensington; Kingston; Lee; Madbury; Middleton;
Milton; New Castle; New Durham; Newfields; Newington; Newmarket;
Nottingham; North Hampton; Northwood; Portsmouth; Raymond; Rochester;
Rollinsford; Rye; Sandown; Seabrook; Somersworth; Strafford; Stratham;
and Wakefield.
                                             
 IV. "Coastal water resources'' means the Gulf of Maine and
associated coastal embayments on the Atlantic coast of New Hampshire,
and the Great Bay estuary.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 VI. "Great Bay estuary'' means the Piscataqua River, Great Bay and
Little Bay, all tidal portions of the Bellamy, Cocheco, Lamprey, Oyster,
Salmon Falls, Squamscott, and Winnicut Rivers, and the tidal portion of
all minor tributaries to the Piscataqua River Great Bay, or Little Bay.
                                             
 VII. "Low impact development'' means development that incorporates
best management practices to reduce impervious surfaces, preserve
natural hydrology, and reduce stormwater volumes and pollution. Low
impact development practices include, but are not limited to, project
designs that reduce the amount of impervious cover, porous pavements,
gravel wetlands, and green rooftops.
                                             
 VIII. "Municipalities'' means cities, towns, and village districts.
                                             
 IX. "State's economic growth, resource protection, and planning
policy'' means the policy established pursuant to RSA 9-B.
                                             
 X. "Stormwater utility'' means a special assessment district
established to generate funding specifically for stormwater management,
under RSA 149-I:6-a.

**Source.** 2004, 258:1. 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:3

 **485-E:3 Southeast Watershed Alliance. –** There is hereby
established a public body corporate and politic having a distinct legal
existence separate from the state and not constituting a department or
agency of the state government to be known as the Southeast Watershed
Alliance, also known as the Alliance. The Alliance shall include those
municipalities in New Hampshire whose boundaries include a portion of
the coastal watershed and who have agreed to participate the Alliance.
The public purpose of the Alliance is:
                                             
 I. To engage in improved municipal, intermunicipal, and regional
planning, studies, public education, and implementation measures,
including potential investments, relative to water quality, water
supply, wastewater and stormwater management, septic systems and
septage, and land use, for the purpose of improving and protecting the
water quality and natural hydrology of the state's coastal water
resources and associated waters, and to more effectively address on a
watershed basis the challenges of meeting state and federal regulations,
including waste load limits and allocations. Such planning and
investments may include, but are not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Establishing intermunicipal stormwater utilities and any
associated facilities.
                                             
 (b) Establishing intermunicipal or regional wastewater districts
and facilities.
                                             
 (c) Establishing and coordinating common municipal regulations
for nutrient reduction and water quality protection, such as stormwater,
wetlands, and buffer regulations.
                                             
 (d) Developing and implementing, in coordination with the
department, innovative means to achieve compliance with nutrient and
other pollutant reductions, such as a nutrients offset or trading
program.
                                             
 (e) Addressing water supply and water conservation measures.
                                             
 II. To foster improved municipal and intermunicipal land use
planning and regulation, in coordination with the applicable regional
planning commissions, such as to encourage low impact development and
innovative zoning and land use management approaches, and to advance the
state's economic growth, resource protection, and planning policy.

**Source.** 2004, 258:1. 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:4

 **485-E:4 Advisory Committee. –** The Alliance shall include an
advisory committee consisting of the commissioner of the department, or
designee, the commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee, the Strafford, Rockingham, and southern New Hampshire regional
planning commission executive directors, or designees, and the
Piscataqua Region Estuaries Partnership director, or designee. The
committee shall provide technical assistance, education, scientific
advice, and consultation on whether plans advance the state's economic
growth, resource protection, and planning policy, and otherwise share
expertise and provide resources to assist the Alliance, in accordance
with available resources. Members of the advisory committee shall be
nonvoting members of the Alliance. The Alliance may add members to the
advisory committee as it determines its needs for expertise.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:5

 **485-E:5 Duties of the Department. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall, no later than October 1, 2009:
                                             
 (a) Notify the governing bodies, planning boards, conservation
commissions, and public works departments of each municipality in the
coastal watershed, and the applicable regional planning commissions, of
the establishment of the Southeast Watershed Alliance and of the need
and purpose of the Alliance, and solicit their participation;
                                             
 (b) Convene an organizing meeting or meetings, at which the
department shall describe the purpose of this chapter, the challenges
facing the Great Bay estuary and coastal resources, the potential scope
of the Alliance's activities, and the method prescribed by this chapter
for coastal watershed municipalities to join the Alliance; and
                                             
 (c) Provide technical and logistical assistance, as resources
allow, to the Alliance until such time as it is self-supporting.
                                             
 II. The department shall, no later than January 1, 2010, hold a
meeting of all coastal watershed municipalities that have joined the
Alliance to elect a chairperson of the Alliance and to begin the process
of developing the Alliance's operating procedures and organizational
structure.

**Source.** 2004, 258:1. 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:6

 **485-E:6 Method of Joining Southeast Watershed Alliance. –** Any
Alliance municipality may elect to participate or subsequently to
withdraw from participation in the Alliance by vote of its governing
body.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:7

 **485-E:7 General Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The Southeast Watershed Alliance may engage in:
                                             
 (a) Intermunicipal and regional planning, coordination, and
public education.
                                             
 (b) Intermunicipal implementation measures, including but not
limited to, intermunicipal investments and the establishment of
intermunicipal agreements in furtherance of the purposes of this
chapter.
                                             
 II. The Alliance shall establish governing operating procedures and
organizational structure, as follows:
                                             
 (a) At the meeting required by RSA 485-E:5, II, members of the
Alliance shall establish a planning committee which shall propose a
board of directors and draft operating procedures and organizational
structure in furtherance of the public purpose of the Alliance and this
chapter, in accordance with all state laws. The planning committee shall
include representatives from 8 coastal watershed municipalities and a
representative of the advisory committee.
                                             
 (b) The Alliance shall hold a meeting no later than 180 days
following the meeting required by RSA 485-E:5, II at which the planning
committee shall present the proposed operating procedures,
organizational structure, and proposed board of directors for the
Alliance's review, modification, and approval. The Alliance chairperson
shall send the approved operating procedures and organizational
structure to the attorney general and department of environmental
services for their review and approval. The attorney general shall
approve any proposed agreement unless it is in improper form or is
incompatible with the requirements of this chapter and the laws of this
state. The attorney general shall notify in writing to the governing
bodies and the planning committee the details of any specific respects
in which the proposed agreement fails to meet the requirements of law.
Approval by the attorney general shall be required for the operating
procedures and organizational structure to be legally valid. Failure by
the attorney general to disapprove an agreement within 30 days of its
submission shall constitute approval. The department shall provide
comment, including recommendations for improvement, to the committee and
governing bodies within 30 days of the proposed agreement's submission
relative to its compatibility with the state water statutes and rules.
                                             
 (c) The Alliance may amend its operating procedures and
organizational structure, if necessary, to engage in implementation
measures, including the establishment of intermunicipal agreements
pursuant to RSA chapter 53-A. Any such amendments shall be presented and
approved at a properly noticed public meeting, and submitted to and
reviewed by the attorney general and the department consistent with
subparagraph (b).
                                             
 III. The Alliance shall have the power to engage in intermunicipal
and regional planning, coordination, and public education in furtherance
of the purpose of this chapter during and after the establishment of the
Alliance's bylaws, and before the department's final adoption of water
quality standards establishing applicable numeric nutrient criteria.
                                             
 IV. The Alliance shall have the power to engage in implementation
measures consisting of intermunicipal agreements property and
investments, staff, services and facilities, and the establishment of
intermunicipal or regional districts, in furtherance of the purposes of
this chapter. Intermunicipal or regional districts, and implementation
measures needed to fund and construct intermunicipal or regional
infrastructure, including the incurring of obligations or the raising
and appropriating of revenue, shall be established pursuant to
cooperative agreements, which shall be valid only if established in
accordance with RSA 53-A. After the department's final adoption of water
quality standards establishing applicable numeric nutrient criteria, the
Alliance may develop a water quality management plan and, at its
discretion, establish a water quality planning committee to determine
the advisability of establishing one or more intermunicipal water
quality management districts to implement such water quality management
plan. The Alliance may engage in implementation measures prior to the
department's final adoption of water quality standards.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:8

 **485-E:8 Southeast Watershed Alliance Fund. –** The Alliance shall
establish a southeast watershed alliance fund to assist the activities
of the Alliance and Alliance municipalities in furthering the purpose of
the Alliance and this chapter. The fund shall be nonlapsing, and shall
be used only for planning, public education and outreach, organizational
assistance, and implementation and infrastructure uses consistent with
the purposes of this chapter, and may consist of moneys provided by
Alliance municipalities, the state and federal governments, and private
sources. The fund shall be administered by the department on behalf of
the Alliance until such time as the Alliance has adopted its operating
procedures and organizational structure and has the fiduciary capacity
to administer the funds, as determined by the department.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:9

 **485-E:9 Regional Outfall Construction; Prohibition. –** The
Alliance shall not construct a regional outfall that transfers water out
of the Great Bay estuary watershed directly into the Gulf of Maine
absent legislation specifically authorizing it to do so.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:10

 **485-E:10 Exemption From Taxes. –** Any property of the Alliance
acquired and used to further the public purpose of planning, developing,
and implementing wastewater and stormwater management and other water
quality management solutions that protect the water quality and natural
hydrology of the state's coastal resources and associated waters, is
hereby declared to be public property and shall be exempt from all taxes
and special assessments of the state or any of its subdivisions. No
taxes or assessments shall be imposed upon the activities of the
Alliance or upon any of its revenues.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:11

 **485-E:11 Exemption From Regulation. –** The New Hampshire public
utilities commission shall regulate the Alliance only with regard to
insurance and safety requirements.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:12

 **485-E:12 Report. –** The Alliance shall, no later than November 1
each year, provide to the senate president, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the senate energy, environment and economic development
committee, and the house resources, recreation and development
committee, a report on the Alliance's work and progress in carrying out
the purposes of this chapter, and on recommendations for further
legislation.

**Source.** 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 485-E:13

 **485-E:13 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 2004, 258:1. 2009, 220:1, eff. July 15, 2009.
