---
title: |
    CHAPTER 485-G COASTAL MARINE NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT
    COMMISSION
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 485-G
                                             
COASTAL MARINE NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT COMMISSION
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 485-G:1

 **485-G:1 Commission Established. –** There is established a coastal
marine natural resources and environment commission.

**Source.** 2016, 156:1, eff. July 26, 2016.

### Section 485-G:2

 **485-G:2 Membership and Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (b) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of environmental services,
or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The executive director of fish and game, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The chair of the advisory committee on marine fisheries, or
designee.
                                             
 (g) Two representatives of the aquaculture industry, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (h) One commercial fisherman, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (i) One recreational fisherman, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (j) The Great Bay-Piscataqua Waterkeeper.
                                             
 (k) One representative of the cooperative extension in fisheries,
appointed by the dean of the cooperative extension.
                                             
 (l) One environmental scientist from the University of New
Hampshire, appointed by the president of the University of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (m) One representative of the New Hampshire Chapter of the Nature
Conservancy, appointed by the director of the board of trustees of the
New Hampshire chapter.
                                             
 II. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.

**Source.** 2016, 156:1, eff. July 26, 2016.

### Section 485-G:3

 **485-G:3 Duties. –** The commission shall:
                                             
 I. Investigate, monitor, and propose prevention and mitigation
strategies for emerging environmental threats in coastal and Great Bay
waters, including but not limited to warming of waters, ocean
acidification, sedimentation, and nutrient loading, which impact fish,
shellfish, and the food chain thereof.
                                             
 II. Identify gaps and recommend improvements in water quality
monitoring, including monitoring pH and evaluating its impact on the
impaired waters designation of water bodies.
                                             
 III. Recommend strategies for enhancing capacities for improving
water quality.
                                             
 IV. Examine the Blue Carbon credit program for sea grass promotion
and oyster bed restoration.
                                             
 V. Report annually on November 1 to the chairpersons of the house
and senate committees with jurisdiction over issues affecting coastal
marine resources and the environment, the president of the senate, the
speaker of the house of representatives, and the governor.

**Source.** 2016, 156:1, eff. July 26, 2016.

### Section 485-G:4

 **485-G:4 Chairperson; Quorum. –** The members of the commission
shall elect a chairperson from among the members. The first meeting of
the commission shall be called by the first-named senate member. The
first meeting of the commission shall be held within 45 days of the
effective date of this section. Four members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 2016, 156:1, eff. July 26, 2016.
