---
title: |
    CHAPTER 485-D NEW HAMPSHIRE-VERMONT INTERSTATE PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
    COMPACT
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 485-D
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE-VERMONT INTERSTATE PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY COMPACT
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 485-D:1

 **485-D:1 Compact. –** The state of New Hampshire enters into the
following compact with the state of Vermont subject to the terms and
conditions therein stated:

**Article I. General Provisions**


                                             
 **A. Statement of policy.** It is recognized that in certain cases
municipalities in New Hampshire and Vermont may, in order to avoid
duplication of cost and effort, and in order to take advantage of
economies of scale, find it necessary or advisable to enter into
agreements whereby joint public water supply facilities are erected and
maintained. The states of New Hampshire and Vermont recognize the value
of and need for such agreements, and adopt this compact in order to
authorize their establishment.
                                             
 **B. Requirement of congressional approval.** This compact shall not
become effective until approved by the United States Congress.
                                             
 **C. Definitions.**
                                             
 1. "Municipalities'' shall mean cities, towns, village districts,
or other incorporated units of local government possessing authority to
construct, maintain, and operate public water supply facilities and to
raise revenue therefor by bonding and taxation, which may legally impose
and collect user charges and impose and enforce regulatory control upon
users of public water supply facilities.
                                             
 2. "Public water supply facilities'' shall mean publicly-owned
water supply sources, storage, treatment, transmission, and distribution
facilities, and ancillary facilities regardless of whether or not the
same qualify for federal or state construction grants-in-aid.
                                             
 3. "Water supply agency'' shall mean the agencies within New
Hampshire and Vermont possessing regulating authority over the
construction, maintenance, and operation of public water supply
facilities and the administration of grants-in-aid from their respective
state for the construction of such facilities.

**Article II. Procedures and Conditions Governing Intergovernmental
Agreements**


                                             
 **A. Cooperative agreements authorized.** Any 2 or more
municipalities, one or more located in New Hampshire and one or more
located in Vermont, may enter into cooperative agreements for the
construction, maintenance, and operation of public water supply
facilities serving all the municipalities who are parties thereto.
                                             
 **B. Approval of agreements.** Any agreement entered into under this
compact shall, prior to becoming effective, be approved by the water
supply agency of each state, and shall be in a form established jointly
by said agencies of both states.
                                             
 **C. Method of adopting agreements.** Agreements shall be adopted by
the legislative body of each municipality in accordance with statutory
procedures for the adoption of interlocal agreements between
municipalities within each state.
                                             
 **D. Review and approval of plans.** The water supply agency of the
state in which any part of a public water supply facility which is
proposed under an agreement pursuant to this compact is proposed to be
or is located, is hereby authorized and required, to the extent such
authority exists under its state law, to review and approve or
disapprove all reports, designs, plans, and other engineering documents
required to apply for federal grants-in-aid or grants-in-aid from said
agency's state, and to supervise and regulate the planning, design,
construction, maintenance, and operation of said part of the facility.
                                             
 **E. Federal grants and financing.**
                                             
 1. Application for federal grants-in-aid for the planning,
design, and construction of public water supply facilities other than
distribution facilities shall be made jointly by the agreeing
municipalities, with the amount of the grant attributable to each
state's allotment to be based upon the relative total capacity reserves
allocated to the municipalities in the respective states determined
jointly by the respective state water supply agencies. Each municipality
shall be responsible for applying for federal and state grants for
distribution facilities to be located within the municipal boundaries.
                                             
 2. Municipalities are hereby authorized to raise and appropriate
revenue for the purpose of contributing pro rata to the planning,
design, and construction cost of public water supply facilities
constructed and operated as joint facilities pursuant to this compact.
                                             
 **F. Contents of agreements.** Agreements entered into pursuant to
this compact shall contain at least the following:
                                             
 1. A system of charges for users of the joint public water supply
facilities.
                                             
 2. A uniform set of standards for users of the joint public water
supply facilities.
                                             
 3. A provision for the pro rata sharing of operating and
maintenance costs based upon the ratio of actual usage as measured by
devices installed to gauge such usage with reasonable accuracy.
                                             
 4. A provision establishing a procedure for the arbitration and
resolution of disputes.
                                             
 5. A provision establishing a procedure for the carriage of
liability insurance, if such insurance is necessary under the laws of
either state.
                                             
 6. A provision establishing a procedure for the modification of
the agreement.
                                             
 7. A provision establishing a procedure for the adoption of
regulations for the use, operation, and maintenance of the public water
supply facilities.
                                             
 8. A provision setting forth the means by which the municipality
that does not own the joint public water supply facility will pay the
other municipality its share of the maintenance and operating costs of
said facility.

**Article III. Applicability of State Laws**


                                             
 Cooperative agreements entered into by municipalities under this
compact shall be consistent with, and shall not supersede, the laws of
the state in which each municipality is located. Notwithstanding any
provision of this compact, actions taken by a municipality pursuant to
this compact, or pursuant to an agreement entered into under this
compact, including the incurring of obligations or the raising and
appropriating of revenue, shall be valid only if taken in accordance
with the laws of the state in which such municipality is located.

**Article IV. Construction**


                                             
 Nothing in this compact shall be construed to authorize the
establishment of interstate districts, authorities, or any other new
governmental or quasi-governmental entity.

**Article V. Effective Date**


                                             
 This compact shall become effective when a bill of the Vermont
general assembly which incorporates the compact becomes a law in Vermont
and when it is approved by the United States Congress.

**Source.** 1995, 198:2, eff. June 12, 1995.
