---
title: |
    CHAPTER 485-F ADMINISTRATION OF THE DRINKING WATER AND GROUNDWATER TRUST
    FUND
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 485-F
                                             
ADMINISTRATION OF THE DRINKING WATER AND GROUNDWATER TRUST FUND
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 485-F:1

 **485-F:1 Purpose Statement. –** The general court recognizes that
the widespread and persistent contamination of the state's drinking
water and groundwater by MTBE requires a comprehensive strategy designed
to ensure the continued availability of safe drinking water for all New
Hampshire citizens. Therefore, to the extent practicable and consistent
with the provisions of this chapter, existing groundwater resources
shall be preserved and protected and alternative sources of drinking
water shall be made available. In meeting these goals, the general court
recognizes the connection between groundwater and surface water, the
magnitude of the problem that must be resolved, the number of
alternatives that may best provide safe drinking water including, but
not limited to, on-site treatment and the expansion of drinking water
infrastructure, and the resulting need for flexibility with respect to
implementation of this chapter. The general court hereby declares that
the purpose of RSA 485-F is to provide for the protection, preservation,
and enhancement of the drinking water and groundwater resources of the
state.

**Source.** 2016, 11:2, eff. Mar. 31, 2016.

### Section 485-F:2

 **485-F:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Trust fund'' means the drinking water and groundwater trust
fund established in RSA 6-D:1.

**Source.** 2016, 11:2, eff. Mar. 31, 2016.

### Section 485-F:3

 **485-F:3 Implementation of Drinking Water and Groundwater
Protection. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall administer the drinking water and
groundwater trust fund through the MTBE remediation bureau. Subject to
the approval of the fiscal committee of the general court, trust fund
proceeds sufficient to fund the department's MTBE remediation bureau and
qualifying projects shall be transferred to the department and
maintained in a separate, nonlapsing account, continually appropriated
to the department for the purpose of paying all costs of this program.
The department shall:
                                             
 (a) Investigate, manage, and remediate contaminated groundwater.
                                             
 (b) Protect against future contamination or impacted drinking
water sources through measures including, but not limited to, the
expansion of drinking water infrastructure or drinking water source
protection.
                                             
 (c) Assist local and regional entities in the development and
administration of local wellhead protection programs, including
delineation of wellhead protection areas and the inventory and
management of activities which have a potential effect on groundwater
quality.
                                             
 (d) Maintain a statewide map identifying the classes of
groundwater.
                                             
 (e) Measure levels of contamination statewide and generate maps
to show the areas of greatest contamination.
                                             
 (f) Maintain an inventory of wells serving public water supply
systems, and to the extent practicable other wells, and establish a
priority list for delineation of systems that are currently contaminated
with MTBE.
                                             
 (g) Provide funding through cost-sharing grants to
municipalities, municipally-owned water utilities, and water utilities
regulated by the public utilities commission for the design,
construction, and extension of public water systems, and the
establishment and expansion of wellhead protection areas where they
provide the most cost-effective method for providing safe and clean
drinking water.
                                             
 II. The department shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, necessary to
implement this chapter. Such rules may include funding qualifications,
funding application requirements, provisions for cost-sharing related to
municipal projects, and other provisions consistent with the purposes
and requirements of this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 11:2, eff. Mar. 31, 2016.

### Section 485-F:4

 **485-F:4 New Hampshire Drinking Water and Groundwater Advisory
Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire drinking water and
groundwater advisory commission which shall consult with and advise the
department relative to the proper administration and management of the
drinking water and ground water trust fund, as established in RSA 6-D.
The commission shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) The state treasurer, or designee.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) Two members of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (d) The governor, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The director of the division of public health services,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (f) One public member, who shall have business experience related
to the creation and/or delivery of clean and safe drinking water,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (g) One public member, who shall represent the interests of
citizens receiving their drinking water from private wells, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (h) One municipal official, who shall represent municipalities
with public water systems, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (i) One public member, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 II. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among the
members.
                                             
 III. Except for the members appointed under subparagraphs (a)-(e),
members shall be appointed for 2-year staggered terms.
                                             
 IV. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation,
except that legislative members shall receive mileage at the legislative
rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 V. The department shall provide an annual report to the commission
that includes information on expenditures for the fiscal year, projects
begun or completed during the year, and projections on future program
costs.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall meet at least annually. The commission
shall, at least annually, provide a report to the general court with
information on the progress of the MTBE efforts, expenditures for the
year, projects begun or completed during the previous year, the balance
in the trust fund, and any other information the commission deems
appropriate.
                                             
 VII. The commission shall, at least annually, review the work and
projects funded by the trust fund during the previous year. The
commission shall, at least annually, consult with the department
regarding these activities, and provide advice and counsel relative to
future work and project priorities, as outlined in RSA 485-F:3, I.
                                             
 VIII. At least every 5 years, the commission shall prepare and file
a report with the general court evaluating the progress made relative to
MTBE contamination, the efficiency of the program established under this
chapter, and whether it continues to provide the maximum benefit to New
Hampshire citizens, and providing any recommendations on potential
additional tasks for which the trust fund could be used to improve
access to safe and clean drinking water.

**Source.** 2016, 11:2, eff. Mar. 31, 2016.
