---
title: CHAPTER 485 NEW HAMPSHIRE SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 485
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT
-------------------------------------

Public Water Supply Protection Program
--------------------------------------

### Section 485:1

 **485:1 Statement of Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive
drinking water protection program for the citizens of New Hampshire. It
shall be consistent with and at least as stringent as the Federal Safe
Drinking Water Act standards.
                                             
 II. In order to implement a comprehensive drinking water protection
program, the department of environmental services shall:
                                             
 (a) Monitor the water quality of public water supplies and
privately owned redistribution systems.
                                             
 (b) Provide technical assistance to water operators and the
general public.
                                             
 (c) Review the design of proposed public water systems, privately
owned redistribution systems, and alterations for existing systems.
Review of the alteration of existing privately owned redistribution
systems shall be limited to alterations that involve more than 500 feet
of new installation of distribution piping or the addition of new
exterior pumping or storage facilities.
                                             
 (d) Periodically conduct sanitary surveys of public water systems
and privately owned redistribution systems to make certain of proper
safety and operation.
                                             
 (e) Require that public water supplies comply with all pertinent
federal and state statutes and rules.
                                             
 (f) Educate citizens for the need and methods of providing safe
and adequate drinking water.
                                             
 (g) Approve sources of water used in the manufacture of bottled
water.
                                             
 (h) Monitor the operation and maintenance of privately owned
redistribution systems.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 163:1. 1996, 228:108. 1997, 155:4. 2008,
279:1, 2, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 485:1-a

 **485:1-a Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Community water system'' means a public water system which
serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or
regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents.
                                             
 I-a. "Brackish'' means a concentration in water of dissolved solids
that is between 1,000 and 10,000 milligrams per liter.
                                             
 I-b. "Closed loop geothermal system'' means any heating or cooling
system that operates by circulating fluid through a closed loop pipe or
loops of pipes installed in the subsurface or surface water for the
purpose of utilizing the geothermal properties of the subsurface or
surface water as a heat source or sink.
                                             
 II. "Contaminant'' means any physical, chemical, biological or
radiological substance or matter in the water.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 V. "Feasible'' means capable of being done with the use of the best
technology, treatment techniques, and other means which the department
finds, after examination for efficacy under field as well as laboratory
conditions, is available at reasonable cost.
                                             
 V-a. "Freshwater'' means water with a concentration of total
dissolved solids that is less than 1,000 milligrams per liter.
                                             
 VI. "Household equivalent'' means water usage equal to 300 gallons
per day.
                                             
 VII. "Maximum contaminant level'' means the maximum permissible
level of a contaminant in water which is delivered to the free flowing
outlet of the ultimate user of a public water system, except in the case
of turbidity where the maximum permissible level is measured at the
point of entry to the distribution system. Contaminants added to the
water under circumstances controlled by the user, except those resulting
from corrosion of piping and plumbing caused by water quality, are
excluded from the definition.
                                             
 VIII. "Maximum contaminant level goal'' means that level of a
contaminant in water at which no known or anticipated adverse effects on
the health of consumers occur and which allows an adequate margin of
safety, as determined by federal and state agencies.
                                             
 IX. "National Drinking Water Regulations'' means the drinking water
regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act,
P.L. 93-523, as amended.
                                             
 X. "Non-community water system'' means a public water system that is
not a community water system.
                                             
 XI. "Non-transient non-community water system'' means a system which
is not a community water system and which serves the same 25 people, or
more, over 6 months per year.
                                             
 XI-a. "Open loop geothermal system'' means any heating or cooling
system that operates by withdrawing water from a well and returning the
water to the source well or another well for the purpose of utilizing
the geothermal properties of the subsurface as a heat source or sink.
                                             
 XII. "Operator'' means the individual who has direct management
responsibility for the routine supervision and operation of a public
water system or of a water treatment plant or collection, treatment,
storage, or distribution facility or structure that is a part of a
system.
                                             
 XIII. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, company, public
or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the state,
department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, or any other
legal entity.
                                             
 XIV. "Political subdivision'' means any municipality, county,
district, or any portion or combination of 2 or more thereof.
                                             
 XIV-a. "Privately owned redistribution system'' means a system for
the provision of piped water for human consumption which does not meet
the definition of public water system under paragraph XV, and meets all
the following criteria: (1) obtains all of its water from, but is not
owned or operated by, a public water system; (2) serves a population of
at least 25 people, 10 household units, or 15 service connections,
whichever is fewest, for at least 60 days per year; and (3) has exterior
pumping facilities, not including facilities used to reduce pressure, or
exterior storage facilities which are not part of building plumbing.
                                             
 XV. "Public water system'' means a system for the provision to the
public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least
15 service connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25
individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year. Such term includes
(1) any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities
under control of the operator of such system and used primarily in
connection with such system, and (2) any collection or pretreatment
storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily in
connection with such system. Any water system which meets all of the
following conditions is not a public water system:
                                             
 (a) Consists only of distribution and storage facilities (and
does not have any collection and treatment facilities);
                                             
 (b) Obtains all of its water from, but is not owned or operated
by, a public water system; and
                                             
 (c) Does not sell water to any person.
                                             
 XV-a. "Source of water'' means a spring, artesian well, spa, geyser,
drilled well, public water supply, or other source, of any water used in
the manufacture of bottled water, which has been inspected and approved
by the department.
                                             
 XV-b. "Salt water'' means water with a concentration of total
dissolved solids that exceeds 10,000 milligrams per liter.
                                             
 XVI. "Supplier of water'' means any person who controls, owns or
generally manages a public water system.
                                             
 XVII. "Water treatment plant'' means that portion of the public
water system which is designed to alter the physical, chemical,
biological or radiological quality of the water or to remove any
contaminants.
                                             
 XVIII. "Wellhead protection area'' means the surface and subsurface
area surrounding a water well or wellfield, supplying a public water
system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward
and reach such water well or wellfield.
                                             
 XIX. "Water conservation'' means any beneficial reduction in water
losses, waste, or use.

**Source.** 1990, 163:2. 1996, 228:68, 106. 1997, 155:5. 2002, 142:1.
2008, 279:3. 2009, 27:2-5, eff. July 7, 2009.

### Section 485:2

 **485:2 Administration. –** This chapter shall be administered by
the department, which is authorized to:
                                             
 I. Enter into agreements, contracts or cooperative arrangements
under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate with other
state, federal or interstate agencies, municipalities, education
institutions, local health departments or other organizations or
individuals.
                                             
 II. Receive financial and technical assistance from the federal
government and other public or private agencies.
                                             
 III. Participate in related programs of the federal government,
other states, interstate agencies, or other public agencies or
organizations.
                                             
 IV. Establish adequate fiscal controls and accounting procedures to
assure proper disbursement of and accounting for funds.
                                             
 V. Adopt rules under RSA 541-A to carry out the requirements of this
chapter as listed in RSA 485:3.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:69, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:3

 **485:3 Drinking Water Rules. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt under RSA 541-A, following public
hearing, drinking water rules and primary drinking water standards which
are necessary to protect the public health and which shall apply to all
public water systems. Such rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) identification of contaminants which may have an adverse
effect on the health of persons;
                                             
 (b) specification for each contaminant of either:
                                             
 (1) a maximum contaminant level that is acceptable in water
for human consumption, if it is feasible to ascertain the level of such
contaminant in water in public water systems; or
                                             
 (2) one or more treatment techniques or methods which lead to
a reduction of the level of such contaminant sufficient to protect the
public health, if it is not feasible to ascertain the level of such
contaminant in water in the public water system; and
                                             
 (c) criteria and procedures to assure compliance with the levels
or methods determined under subparagraph (b), including quality control
monitoring and testing procedures and standards to ensure compliance
with such levels or methods; criteria and standards to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of the system; requirements as to the minimum
quality of water which may be delivered to the consumer; and
requirements with respect to siting new facilities. Such rules shall be
no less stringent than the most recent national Primary Drinking Water
Regulations in effect, as issued or promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt secondary drinking water rules, which
are necessary to protect the public welfare. Such rules may apply to any
contaminant in drinking water which may adversely affect the color,
odor, taste or appearance of the water and consequently may cause a
substantial number of persons to discontinue using a public water
system, or which may otherwise adversely affect the public welfare. Such
rules may vary according to geographic, economic, technical or other
relevant circumstances. Such rules shall reasonably assure the
protection of the public welfare and the supply of aesthetically
adequate drinking water.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall adopt under RSA 541-A all rules
necessary to implement the requirements of the following sections of
this chapter:
                                             
 (a) RSA 485:42.
                                             
 (b) RSA 485:43.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may adopt rules specifying criteria and
procedures for requiring public water systems to conduct monitoring
programs for contaminants which are not identified in the national
primary drinking water regulations, but which have been identified by
the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
as "unregulated contaminants.'' Such rules shall require monitoring of
drinking water supplied by the system and shall vary the frequency and
schedule of monitoring requirements for systems. An unregulated
contaminant is one for which no maximum contaminant level or treatment
technique has been established under paragraph I or II. In developing
such rules, the commissioner shall consider materials submitted by the
department of health and human services, pursuant to RSA 125-H:3. Rules
adopted under this paragraph shall list unregulated contaminants for
which public water systems may be required to monitor. Any list
established pursuant to this paragraph shall be consistent with, but not
limited by, the list of unregulated contaminants identified in
regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules specifying the criteria under
which filtration, including coagulation and sedimentation, as
appropriate, is required as a treatment technique for public water
systems supplied by surface water sources. In developing such rules the
commissioner shall consider the quality of source waters, protection
afforded by watershed management, treatment practices such as
disinfection and length of water storage and other factors relevant to
protection of health. The commissioner may require any public water
supply system to assist in determining the necessity of filtration in
that system. The commissioner shall provide an opportunity for notice
and public hearing prior to implementation of any filtration
requirement. Following such hearing, the commissioner shall prescribe,
by rule adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, a compliance schedule for such
filtration requirement.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner may adopt rules requiring disinfection as a
treatment technique for all public water systems.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner may adopt rules specifying the criteria and
procedures to be used to identify and notify persons who may be affected
by lead contamination of their drinking water when such contamination
results from either the lead content in the construction materials of
the public water system or the corrosivity of the water supply, or both.
The commissioner may also adopt rules prohibiting the use of lead pipes,
solder and flux in the installation or repair of any public water system
or any plumbing in a residential or nonresidential facility providing
water for human consumption. Such rules shall not prohibit the use of
leaded joints necessary for the repair of cast iron pipes.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner may adopt rules relative to defining the best
available technology, treatment techniques, or other means which are
feasible for the purpose of meeting the federal maximum contaminant
level. In defining the best available technology, treatment technique or
other means, the commissioner may consider the number of persons served
by the system, other physical conditions related to engineering
feasibility and cost of compliance, and information contained in health
risk assessments provided by the department of health and human services
pursuant to RSA 125-H:3, II and IV. Such rules shall specify all
applicable criteria relative to the commissioner's determination.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner may adopt rules to implement a wellhead
protection program pursuant to RSA 485:48.
                                             
 X. The commissioner may adopt rules to implement the Underground
Injection Control Program of the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42
U.S.C. section 300f et seq., as well as rules pertaining to permits for
the regulation and remediation of contamination from previous discharges
or disposal of waste to the groundwater. The commissioner's rules shall
include criteria and procedures to ensure that past and present
underground injection will not endanger drinking water sources, and
shall provide for consideration of varying geologic, hydrologic, or
other conditions in different areas within the state.
                                             
 XI. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
specifying the water quality standards and other criteria and procedures
for obtaining a permit to use a source of water for the manufacture of
bottled water.
                                             
 XII. The commissioner may adopt rules to ensure long-term viability
of public drinking water systems as required by section 119 of the
federal Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996, 42 U.S.C. section
300g-9 to qualify for full eligibility for federal and state revolving
fund capital grants.
                                             
 XIII. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to new groundwater withdrawals of 57,600 gallons or more in any
24-hour period by public water systems. Such rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) Criteria and procedures for requiring public water systems to
identify and address impacts of withdrawals on surface waters,
subsurface waters, water-related natural resources, and public, private,
residential, and farm wells within the anticipated zone of contribution
to the withdrawal.
                                             
 (b) Requirements relative to conservation management plans which
demonstrate the need for the proposed withdrawals, to be submitted by
the public water system seeking approval for a withdrawal.
                                             
 (c) Procedures by which the department may deny permission for
withdrawals or order the applicant to provide a response policy, as
provided by department rules, for provision of alternative water supply
at no initial capital cost to persons whose wells are adversely affected
by the proposed withdrawal or order reduced withdrawals if hydrogeologic
data indicate that water-related resources are being adversely affected
by the withdrawals.
                                             
 XIV. The commissioner may adopt rules to:
                                             
 (a) Regulate the heat exchange fluids utilized in closed loop
geothermal systems. The commissioner's rules shall include criteria and
procedures to ensure that these substances when released to the
environment will not endanger drinking water sources.
                                             
 (b) Prohibit the construction of open loop geothermal systems
where such process will contaminate freshwater aquifers with brackish or
saline groundwater.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1991, 344:3. 1992, 289:53. 1995, 310:181. 1996,
228:110. 1997, 155:6; 271:1. 1998, 124:1. 2009, 27:6, eff. July 7, 2009.

### Section 485:3-a

 **485:3-a Permit Authority. –** The department may grant operational
permits for public water systems.

**Source.** 1990, 163:3. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:3-b

 **485:3-b Site Assessment Review Fee. –**
                                             
 I. Any person, except for state and local governments including
counties and political subdivisions, that requests an expedited review
of environmental site assessment reports by the department shall pay to
the department a review fee based on the equalized assessed valuation of
the property as determined in rules adopted by the commissioner under
RSA 541-A, shall be as follows:

     Equalized Assessed Valuation Fee 
     $0 to $250,000 $1,800
     $250,001 to $500,000 $2,250
     $500,001 to $1,000,000 $3,750
     greater than $1,000,000 $7,500


                                             
 II. The department shall provide written comments within 60 days
after the date such reports and the required fees are received by the
department.

**Source.** 1993, 289:2; 358:93. 2007, 219:9, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 485:3-c

 **485:3-c Groundwater Management Permit Fee. –** Any person,
submitting a permit application under RSA 485:3, X shall pay to the
department a groundwater management permit application fee of 
                                             $2,000.
Any person who has paid the environmental site assessment review fee
specified in RSA 485:3-b shall be exempt from the groundwater management
permit fee. State and local governments including counties and political
subdivisions shall be exempt from groundwater management permit
application fees, unless eligible for funding under RSA 146-D, RSA
146-E, RSA 146-F, or RSA 146-G.

**Source.** 1993, 289:2. 2007, 219:10, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 485:3-d

 **485:3-d Annual Report Required. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 259:31, VI,
eff. July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 485:4

 **485:4 Power to Require Improvements. –**
                                             
 I. The department is empowered to investigate the sanitary
conditions and methods pertaining to the source, treatment, and
distribution of all public water supplies for domestic use, and to
require the application of any treatment or improvement in conditions
and methods as it may deem necessary to insure fitness and safety and
adequate protection of the public health. If the department determines
that improvements are necessary, the municipality, corporation, or
person shall be so notified in writing and the requirements so ordered
shall be effected pursuant to RSA 38:25 within a reasonable time to be
fixed by the department. Appeals of actions of the department may be
made as provided in RSA 485:59. The department may set intermediate
goals and time frames to assist municipalities, corporations, or persons
to abide by an order of the department under this paragraph.
                                             
 II. Upon complaint of not less than 10 customers of an existing
public water system or not less than 10 residents not currently served
by a public water supply, the department shall make an investigation of
conditions regarding water quality or quantity problems described in the
complaint. If, as a result of any such investigation, the department
concludes that a significant public health or safety problem exists due
to water supply quality or quantity, it shall perform a preliminary
analysis of alternatives which address the problem. The department may
request additional information from the complainants and nearby public
water supply system owners, such as data on water supply quality and
quantity, well characteristics, and water distribution system
characteristics, as is necessary to perform its investigation and
analysis. If the department determines that an extension of water
service from an existing public water supply system to the area of
impaired water quality or quantity is the most feasible and
cost-effective alternative, that the extension is consistent with
municipal master planning, local water system policies and rules, RSA
9-B, and RSA 162-C:2, V, and that the existing public water system has
adequate water supply and system capacity to serve the problem area, the
municipality, corporation, or person who owns the public water system
shall be ordered to allow connection to its water distribution system
from the identified area, regardless of existing municipal or public
water system service area boundaries. The connection so ordered shall be
effected pursuant to RSA 38:25 within a reasonable time to be fixed by
the department and may contain limitations on water system connections
unrelated to the original petition in order to limit unintended land use
impacts. Appeals of actions of the department may be made as provided in
RSA 485:59. The department may set intermediate goals and time frames to
assist municipalities, corporations, or persons to abide by an order of
the department under this paragraph. The provisions of this paragraph or
of any order issued under this paragraph shall not delegate any costs
associated with a connection to the person receiving the order from the
department.
                                             
 III. The department may investigate the sanitary conditions and
methods pertaining to pumper stations, piping, storage, and treatment
facilities of privately owned redistribution systems which present a
threat to public health and safety. If the department determines that
action, such as disinfection, is necessary, the municipality,
corporation, or person shall be so notified in writing and the action so
ordered shall be effected within a reasonable time to be fixed by the
department. Replacement of existing infrastructure shall only be
required in response to a specific public health threat. Appeals of
actions of the department may be made under RSA 485:59. The department
may set intermediate goals and time frames to assist municipalities,
corporations, or persons to abide by an order of the department under
this paragraph.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 33:1. 1995, 88:1. 1996, 228:106. 1997,
206:6. 2002, 141:3. 2008, 279:4, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 485:5

 **485:5 Power to Require Acquisition of Land. –** The acquisition of
adjacent or marginal lands necessary to provide reasonable sanitary
control over the quality of a public water supply shall be deemed an
improvement in sanitary conditions which is within the power of the
department to require under the provisions of RSA 485:4. Municipalities
shall comply with such order pursuant to RSA 38:25.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106. 1997, 206:6, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 485:6

 **485:6 Disinfection. –** Any public water supply system which
utilizes any of the surface water of the state, as defined in RSA 485-A,
as the source of supply, shall, as a minimum means of treatment, be
provided with suitable chlorination or other disinfection facilities
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with rules of the
department adopted under this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:7

 **485:7 Penalty. –** Any municipality, corporation or person who
shall fail to install or to operate and maintain disinfection facilities
in accordance with the foregoing requirements shall be guilty of a
violation for each day of failure to so install, operate or maintain
such equipment. Said penalty shall not be invoked in the event of a bona
fide emergency arising from an unavoidable or unforeseen failure or
casualty to such treatment facilities. It shall be the duty of the
municipality, corporation or person in responsible charge of said public
water supply system to give immediate notice of the emergency condition
to the department in order that appropriate action to safeguard the
public health may be taken.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:8

 **485:8 Approval of Construction Plans. –**
                                             
 I. No person, proposing to supply water for domestic uses through a
public water system or privately owned redistribution system, shall
construct any new system, or enlarge any existing system, for supplying
water to the public without first submitting detailed plans of the
proposed construction to the department and securing its approval of
such plans. The department shall examine the topography and the
watershed, complete an engineering review of the plans and
specifications for said proposed construction, and make chemical and
bacteriological analysis of the waters of the proposed supply, before
approval is granted. The requirements of this paragraph shall only apply
to privately owned redistribution systems if the construction or
enlargement of an existing system involves more than 500 feet of new
installation of distribution piping or the addition of any new exterior
pumping or water storage facility. Any review of plans for a privately
owned redistribution system shall be completed within 30 days of the
submission of such plans.
                                             
 II. No new construction, addition, or alteration involving the
source, treatment, distribution, or storage of water in any public water
system or privately owned redistribution system shall be commenced until
the plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved in
accordance with rules adopted by the department; except, if such
construction, addition, or alteration is exempted by the department
because it will have no effect on public health or welfare, then such
submission and approval is not required. In granting approval of plans
and specifications, the department may require modifications,
conditions, or procedures to ensure, as far as feasible, the protection
of the public health. The department may require the submission of water
samples for analysis to determine the extent of treatment required.
Records of construction, including, where possible, plans and
descriptions of existing public water systems and privately owned
redistribution systems, shall be maintained by such systems and shall be
made available to the department upon request. The requirements of this
paragraph shall only apply to privately owned redistribution systems if
the construction, addition, or alteration of an existing system involves
more than 500 feet of new installation of distribution piping or the
addition of any new exterior pumping or water storage facility. Any
review of plans for a privately owned redistribution system shall be
completed within 30 days of the submission of such plans.
                                             
 III. Any person submitting detailed plans to the department, as
provided in this section, for a new public water system, or an existing
public water system where conversion from transient use to
residential-type use is proposed, shall pay to the department a fee of

                                             $45 per residential unit. When usage cannot be apportioned by
residential units at new public water systems, the fee shall be based on
the flow proportioned equivalent to that of a single family residential
unit. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A defining
flow proportioned equivalency.
                                             
 IV. The fees required under paragraph III shall be for reviewing
such detailed plans and making site inspections as may be necessary. The
fee shall be paid at the time said detailed plans are submitted and
shall be deposited with the state treasurer as unrestricted revenue. The
department shall establish by rule, adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, a
minimum threshold below which no fee is required and a maximum level
above which the fee will not increase.
                                             
 V. Any person proposing to install new public sewerage or sewage
treatment facilities, or to extend, renovate, replace or substantially
repair any such existing facilities, shall submit, at least 30 days in
advance of construction, detailed plans and specifications for such
facilities to the department and secure its approval of such plans and
specifications. The foregoing provisions shall also be applicable to any
institution accommodating 30 or more people, which provides its own
sewage disposal facilities.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:70, 106. 2008, 279:5, eff. July 1,
2009.

### Section 485:9

 **485:9 Highway Construction. –** No public highway, access roads,
or private ways of any sort, shall be constructed so as to traverse any
watershed tributary to a lake, pond or reservoir used for the storage of
public drinking water without first obtaining the approval of the
department.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:10

 **485:10 Approval. –** No person supplying water to the public for
domestic use shall resort to, hold in reserve, or maintain, a connection
through which water may be received from any auxiliary or emergency
source of supply, unless such source shall have been duly declared to,
registered, and approved by the department.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:11

 **485:11 Backflow Device Requirements and Tests, Installations,
Repairs and Replacements. –** There shall be a backflow prevention
device installed at every connection to a public water system if the
facility connected may pose a hazard to the quality of water supplied by
the public water system as determined by the department. Where
applicable, the facility receiving water from a public water supply
shall be responsible for having such drinking water distribution system
protective backflow prevention devices inspected and tested by
individuals certified by a third party who has been approved by the
department to conduct backflow device inspection and testing
certification. The facility shall also have backflow devices installed,
maintained, repaired, and replaced by individuals qualified by either a
plumbers license or by certification by the department under RSA
332-E:3, III proving competency in distribution system operation. The
activities to be conducted by qualified individuals shall be
specifically limited to the inspection and testing, maintenance, repair
or replacement, and installation of the water meters, meter horns,
backflow preventers, and assembly devices directly adjacent to and
required as part of the protection for the drinking water distribution
system. Testing of drinking water distribution system protective
backflow prevention devices, where applicable, shall occur after
installation or repair to ensure that new and repaired devices are
working properly. There shall be a backflow prevention device installed
at every connection to a public water system if the facility connected
may pose a hazard to the quality of water supplied by the public water
system as determined by the department of environmental services. The
facility receiving water from a public water supply shall be responsible
for having such backflow prevention devices installed, serviced, and
tested by individuals qualified by license or certification to perform
these activities. Testing of backflow devices shall occur twice annually
unless the public water supplier determines the facility poses a low
hazard, in which case testing shall be performed on an annual basis. The
facility receiving water from a public water supplier is responsible for
ensuring that the backflow prevention device is working properly to
prevent backflow into the public water system. Testing shall also occur
twice annually for any high hazard devices and facilities. When the
public water supplier determines that the facility poses a low hazard,
testing shall occur annually. A residential property containing a
non-testable device shall not be considered a hazard facility and shall
not require annual testing. A residential property may be considered a
high hazard facility if it has an irrigation system, private well
connection, or other feature that may cause a public health risk. If an
outside irrigation system is the sole reason a residential property is
considered a hazard to the public water supply distribution system, such
irrigation system shall be tested annually during the period when the
irrigation system is operated. The facility receiving water from a
public water supplier is responsible for ensuring that the backflow
prevention device is working properly to prevent backflow into the
public water system.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996. 2013, 50:1,
eff. Aug. 3, 2013. 2014, 304:4, eff. Sept. 30, 2014. 2015, 50:1, eff.
Aug. 1, 2015.

### Section 485:12

 **485:12 Sealed Valves. –** All valves or gates used in the
connection here described, in the case of sources maintained for public
fire protection, shall also be subject to the special seal and
inspection of the department. Whenever it shall become necessary to
break such seal, or to resort to an unapproved emergency source for
public fire protection, notice of such action shall, within 24 hours, be
sent to the said department by telephone or telegraph and also by mail.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:13

 **485:13 Control of Intakes. –** The department shall have general
control and oversight of emergency intakes. It may, when feasible and
deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, upon
reasonable notice, require the abandonment of any existent emergency
source and the adoption of other means of supply.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:14

 **485:14 Use of Fluoride. –** No fluoride shall be introduced into
the public water supply unless and until the municipality or
municipalities using said waters have held a public hearing as to the
introduction of fluoride into the public water supply of said
municipality or municipalities, and the registered voters of such
municipality or municipalities have approved such action pursuant to RSA
44:16, RSA 31:17-a, RSA 52:23, or RSA 485:14-a. For purposes of this
section "municipality'' means a municipality that has 100 or more user
connections that are served from the public water supply.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 2004, 225:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 485:14-a

 **485:14-a Referendum Procedure for Public Water Systems Serving
More Than One Political Subdivision. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the written application of the aggregate of 10 percent of
the registered voters in all of the towns served by a water system,
presented to the clerk of the town owning the water system at least 90
days before the day prescribed for an annual town meeting or city
election, the clerk shall forward a copy of the petition to each town
served by the water system. Upon receipt of the petition, the selectmen
of the town shall insert on the warrant or the official ballot the
following question: "Shall fluoride be used in the public water
system?'' Beside this question shall be printed the word "yes'' and the
word "no'' with the proper boxes for the voter to indicate his or her
choice. If a majority of those voting in a water system that serves
multiple towns does not approve the use of fluoride in the public water
system, no fluoride shall be introduced into the public water system for
said towns. After such popular referendum, the selectmen shall not
insert an article relative to the use of fluoride in the public water
system in the warrant nor shall such question be inserted on the
official ballot for a minimum period of 3 years from the date of the
last popular referendum and only upon written application at that time
of not less than the aggregate of 10 percent of the registered voters of
all of the towns.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Town'' means town as defined in RSA 21:5.
                                             
 (b) "Selectmen'' means selectmen as defined in RSA 21:28.

**Source.** 2004, 225:2. 2008, 230:5, eff. Aug. 19, 2008.

### Section 485:14-b

 **485:14-b Fluoride Statement Required. –**
                                             
 I. If a public water supply is fluoridated, the following notice
shall be posted in the water system's consumer confidence report: "Your
public water supply is fluoridated. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, if your child under the age of 6 months is
exclusively consuming infant formula reconstituted with fluoridated
water, there may be an increased chance of dental fluorosis. Consult
your child's health care provider for more information.''
                                             
 II. The notice shall be located in the section of the consumer
confidence report dedicated to water quality.

**Source.** 2012, 122:1, eff. Aug. 4, 2012.

### Section 485:15

 **485:15 Appeal. –** If the department shall require the abandonment
of any such emergency source the person, corporation or association
aggrieved by such action shall have an appeal to the superior court,
said appeal to be taken within 30 days from the receipt of the order
from said department, and said court may make such order on the appeal
as justice may require.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:16

 **485:16 Penalty. –** Whoever violates any of the provisions of RSA
485:8-13, but not RSA 485:8, II, or fails to comply with the lawful
orders and requirements of the department duly made pursuant to those
sections, or whoever hinders or obstructs any inspector in the pursuit
of his lawful duty in respect to such sections, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE)
----------------------------------

### Section 485:16-a

 **485:16-a Drinking Water Standards and Notification. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health
and human services, shall adopt primary and secondary drinking water
standards pursuant to RSA 485:3, and ambient groundwater quality
standards pursuant to RSA 485-C:6, applicable to MTBE. The commissioner
shall not commence rulemaking for these standards until after the
department has reviewed the scientific record on the risks posed by the
presence of MTBE in drinking water supplies. Such review shall be
completed at the earliest possible date, but no later than January 1,
2000. The commissioner shall commence rulemaking no later than January
1, 2000.
                                             
 II. Any public water system delivering water with greater than 5
parts per billion of MTBE shall notify each customer of the MTBE
content.

**Source.** 1999, 313:2, eff. July 16, 1999.

### Section 485:16-b

 **485:16-b Authority to Limit MTBE in Gasoline; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided for in RSA 485:16-d, the commissioner shall
seek all necessary authorizations from the Environmental Protection
Agency to opt out of the federal reformulated gasoline program as soon
as possible, but in no case later than January 1, 2004. The department
of environmental services shall prepare and submit to the Environmental
Protection Agency as soon as possible, but in no case later than January
1, 2002, all documentation necessary to accomplish this task.
                                             
 II. In addition to the provisions of paragraph I, the commissioner,
after consultation with the commissioner of health and human services,
shall limit to the greatest extent practicable, with the approval of the
governor and council, the concentration of MTBE allowed in any gasoline
sold in all or part of the state after first holding a public hearing on
the issue and certifying to the air pollution advisory committee
established in RSA 125-J:11 that gasolines which meet such limit are:
                                             
 (a) Readily available to New Hampshire consumers at a reasonable
price;
                                             
 (b) Less hazardous overall to humans and the environment than
gasoline having higher MTBE concentrations taking into account all
exposure routes, including air and water; and
                                             
 (c) Approved for use in New Hampshire by the Environmental
Protection Agency without a requirement to substitute additional air
emissions reductions beyond those adopted under RSA 485:16-c.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the commissioner from
phasing in any limitations approved under paragraph II.
                                             
 IV. Retail sellers of gasoline and the suppliers to such retail
sellers shall comply with the provisions of paragraph II or be subject
to the enforcement provisions of RSA 485:58.
                                             
 V. The limitations on MTBE concentrations established under the
provisions of this section shall be exempt from the requirements of RSA
541-A, the administrative procedure act. The department shall file,
however, in the office of legislative services a copy of all rules
adopted, amended, or repealed under this section by the department.

**Source.** 1999, 313:2. 2001, 293:2, eff. July 17, 2001.

### Section 485:16-c

 **485:16-c Adoption of Other Air Pollution Control Measures. –** In
order to reduce air emissions and receive federal credit for such
reductions, the commissioner shall be authorized to establish limits on
the manufacture, use, or sale of consumer products in accordance with
RSA 125-C:6, XVII.

**Source.** 2001, 293:3. 2004, 175:5, eff. May 27, 2004.

### Section 485:16-d

 **485:16-d Regional and Federal Efforts. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner is authorized to promote such regional or
federal efforts as may be required to reduce the ongoing contamination
threat posed by MTBE and other gasoline ethers, including but not
limited to efforts to eliminate the federal oxygen mandate in the
federal Clean Air Act, secure waivers from federal fuel requirements, or
implement cleaner, more protective reformulation of gasoline.
                                             
 II. If an alternative regional or federal approach to cleaner
gasoline is developed which provides equal or greater effectiveness in
reducing concentrations of MTBE and other gasoline ethers than opting
out of the federal reformulated gasoline program under RSA 485:16-b, I,
or does so in a manner that requires less costly substitute emission
control measures under RSA 485:16-c, then the commissioner may implement
such alternative regional or federal approach. Such alternative regional
or federal approach may substitute for opting out of the federal
reformulated gasoline program under RSA 485:16-b, I if undertaken prior
to January 1, 2004.

**Source.** 2001, 293:3, eff. July 17, 2001.

Water Pollution Control
-----------------------

### Section 485:17

 **485:17 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. If a person shall recklessly place, leave, or cause to be placed
or left, in or near a lake, pond, reservoir or stream tributary thereto,
from which the domestic water supply of a city, town, or village is
taken, in whole or in part, any material, substance, or fluid that may
cause such water to become impure or unfit for such purposes, such
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of
a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. If a person shall purposely or knowingly place, leave, or cause
to be placed or left, in or near a lake, pond, reservoir, or stream
tributary thereto, from which the domestic water supply of a city, town,
or village is taken, in whole or in part, any material, substance, or
fluid that may cause such water to become impure or unfit for such
purposes, such person shall be guilty of a class B felony.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 2009, 210:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 485:18

 **485:18 Removal of Polluting Substance. –** The health officer of
the town, or the water commissioners having charge of the water supply,
or the proprietors of the water supply, may remove such material,
substance, or fluid and may recover the expense of removal from the
person who placed the same, or caused it to be placed, in or near the
water, in a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 2009, 210:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 485:19

 **485:19 Willful Pollution. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 210:9, eff. Jan. 1,
2010.
                                             ]

### Section 485:20

 **485:20 Injunctions. –**
                                             
 I. The superior court shall have power to issue injunctions
restraining any person from violating the provisions of RSA 485:17.
                                             
 II. Municipalities may apply to a justice of the superior court for
injunctive relief against existing or impending violations of RSA
485:17. The municipality shall give notice of any such action to the
attorney general and the commissioner of environmental services, who may
take such steps as they deem necessary to ensure uniform statewide
enforcement, including but not limited to joining the action, assuming
sole prosecution of the action, or, as of right, dismissing the action
without prejudice. Such notice shall be given at least 30 days prior to
the commencement of any such action, unless more immediate action is
necessary to prevent irreparable environmental damage or other serious
public harm, in which case such notice shall be given as soon as
practicable, but in no event later than the date of commencement of the
action. This paragraph shall not be construed to affect, in any manner,
existing authority of municipalities to act based upon the provisions of
other statutes or local ordinances.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1991, 340:3. 2009, 210:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 485:21

 **485:21 Fishing; Ice Racing; Penalty. –** Said local legislative
bodies and officers may also adopt all reasonable rules regarding
fishing and the use of boats in and upon any such lake, pond or
reservoir, and regarding racing or speeding horses upon the ice of such
water body, which they may deem expedient. Any person who shall violate
any of said rules after notice of such rules shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:22

 **485:22 Bathing. –** If any person shall bathe in such lake, pond
or reservoir, within the limits prescribed for the protection of said
water supply by the local board of health or health officer or the
department, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:23

 **485:23 Petition to Protect Water Supplies. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever any board of water commissioners, local board of health,
local health officer or 10 or more citizens of any town or city have
reason to believe that a public water or ice supply is being
contaminated or is in danger of contamination, and that the local
regulations are not sufficient or effective to prevent such pollution,
they may petition the department to investigate the case, and to adopt
rules under RSA 541-A as the department may deem necessary for the
protection of the said supply against any pollution that in its judgment
would endanger the public health. Citizens petitioning under this
section shall designate a signatory of the petition as the person to
whom the department shall send its response.
                                             
 II. Whenever any board of water commissioners, local board of
health, or other owner of a public water supply has reason to believe
that a public water supply is in danger of being contaminated or is
otherwise threatened and that an emergency condition exists such that a
petition pursuant to paragraph I to the department and the adoption of
rules would not adequately protect the water supply, the board or owner
may petition the governor to declare a state of emergency for the public
water supply. At the request of the governor, the department shall
consult with the owner of the water supply and make a recommendation as
to emergency protections that may be necessary. If the governor declares
a state of emergency for a public water supply, those additional
protections that the governor deems necessary shall be effective
immediately and for the duration of the emergency. The declaration of a
state of emergency for a public water supply shall not exceed 6 months.
The governor may renew the declaration one time for up to 6 additional
months upon further request by the original petitioner. At such time as
any of the emergency protections are to become permanent, the department
shall initiate rulemaking in accordance with RSA 485:24. Any protections
in the governor's declaration shall be enforced in the same manner as
rules adopted pursuant to RSA 485:24 or RSA 485:25 with violations of
the protections subject to RSA 485:4 and RSA 485:58.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106. 2002, 141:1, eff. May 13, 2002.

### Section 485:23-a

 **485:23-a Review of Private Access Facilities. –** No private boat
access facility shall be constructed to any public waters which serve as
a public water supply for a public or private water utility company,
without the approval of the department of environmental services upon
consultation with the public water access advisory board and
notification to the public utilities commission for any water utility
under its jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1996, 224:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 485:24

 **485:24 Investigations; Rules. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall respond in writing to a petition filed under
RSA 485:23, I, after due investigation, but not later than 30 days after
receipt of the petition, informing the petitioners of the department's
intended action. In response to a petition, or upon its own motion, the
department shall adopt such rules under RSA 541-A as it may deem best to
protect the water or ice supply against any dangerous contamination. If
requested by the department, the local board of water commissioners, the
local board of health, or the local health officer, shall enforce such
rules in cooperation with the department.
                                             
 II. In the case of water supplies any part of which may be outside
the town or city concerned, the health officer of such town or city may
act as an agent of the department for the enforcement of these rules
when so designated by the department. The department may empower the
board of water commissioners, local board of health, or local health
officer and their agents of the affected municipality to enforce rules
adopted under the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106. 2002, 141:2, eff. May. 13, 2002.

### Section 485:25

 **485:25 Interstate Waters. –** To protect the purity of interstate
waters used as sources of public drinking water supply by adjoining
states, the commissioner is authorized, at the request of the state
health department of an adjoining state, to adopt rules under RSA 541-A
for the protection of the purity of the waters of any lakes, ponds,
streams, and reservoirs within any specified drainage area in this
state.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:110, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:26

 **485:26 Penalty for Violation of Rules. –** Any person violating
rules adopted pursuant to RSA 485:24 or 25 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:27

 **485:27 Power to Require Improvements in Sewage Treatment. –** The
department is empowered to investigate the conditions and methods
pertaining to existing systems of sewerage and sewage treatment works
and to require the application of any treatment, improvement or
enlargement of such facilities as will insure their proper operation and
provide adequate protection of the public health. Issuance of orders
requiring changes or improvements in such sewerage systems or treatment
works shall be in the manner as prescribed in RSA 485:4.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:28

 **485:28 Power to Require the Installation of Sewage Facilities. –**
The department is hereby empowered to investigate the conditions and
methods relating to the disposal of sewage in any municipality, as set
forth in RSA 486:1, and to require the installation of public sewers, as
defined in RSA 147:8, whenever such investigation demonstrates that
individual sewage disposal systems are inadequate or incapable of
protecting the health and welfare of the citizens of the affected
municipality or preventing pollution of the surface waters of the state,
as defined in RSA 485-A. Before issuing an order requiring the
installation of public sewer facilities, the department shall notify the
municipality of its findings and shall give the municipality an
opportunity to be heard. After such hearing if it shall be determined
that said facilities are necessary, the municipality shall be so
notified in writing and the requirements so ordered shall be effected
pursuant to RSA 38:25 within a reasonable time to be fixed by the
department. If any municipality whose duty it is to act shall fail or
refuse for a period of 10 days after the expiration of the time fixed by
said order, or, in the case of appeal for a period of 10 days after
final judgment shall have been entered, to obey the same or in good
faith to begin to make the installation as ordered, such municipality so
failing shall be fined not more than 
                                             $1,000 for each day of failure to
comply with the order of the department. Said fine shall be paid to the
state and may be recovered in an action of debt brought by the attorney
general in the name of the state treasurer.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106. 1997, 206:7, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 485:29

 **485:29 Appeal. –** Any person aggrieved by any decision,
regulation, ruling or order made by the department pursuant to the
provisions of RSA 485:24, 27, and 28 may appeal such decisions pursuant
to RSA 21-O:14.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:30

 **485:30 Discharge of Sewage; Penalty. –** No person, association or
corporation shall cause or permit the discharge of sewage or other
deleterious waste from any dwelling, camp, factory, hotel,
boardinghouse, or other commercial establishment into any stream, lake,
pond, or river not previously polluted, without first submitting
detailed plans of said proposed discharge to the department and securing
the approval of the said department. Any person who violates the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:31

 **485:31 Tampering With Public Water Systems. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who tampers with, attempts to tamper with, or makes a
threat to tamper with a public water system shall be guilty of a class B
felony if a natural person and guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding RSA 651:2, a natural person may, in addition to
any sentence of imprisonment, probation or conditional discharge, be
fined not more than 
                                             $50,000 if found guilty of tampering with a public
water system, and not more than 
                                             $25,000 if found guilty of an attempt
to tamper with or making a threat to tamper with a public water system.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
                                             
 III. Any person who tampers, attempts to tamper, or makes a threat
to tamper with a public water system shall be liable to the state, upon
suit brought by the attorney general, for a civil forfeiture not to
exceed 
                                             $50,000 for such tampering or not to exceed 
                                             $25,000 for such
attempt or threat.
                                             
 IV. In this section, the term "tamper'' means:
                                             
 (a) To introduce a contaminant into a public water system with
the purpose of harming persons; or
                                             
 (b) To otherwise interfere with the operation of a public water
system with the purpose of harming persons.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:32

 **485:32 Injuring Property. –** Any person who shall willfully
injure any of the property of any water company or of any city or town,
used by it in supplying water to its inhabitants, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person, and such person shall also forfeit and pay to such water
company, city or town 3 times the amount of actual damages sustained, to
be recovered in an action on the case.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Private Water Sources
---------------------

### Section 485:33

 **485:33 Analyses; Prohibiting Use. –** Whenever any well, spring or
other water supply is suspected of being polluted by sewage or other
matter dangerous to health, the health officer of the town where it is
located may cause an analysis of the water to be made by a competent
chemist, without expense to the owner. If the analysis shows the water
to be unfit for drinking purposes they may, with the approval of the
department, prohibit its use, and, if it be from a well, may cause the
well to be closed.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:34

 **485:34 Enforcement. –** The department shall have concurrent
jurisdiction with local boards and officers to enforce the provisions of
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:35

 **485:35 Prohibiting Use; Penalty. –** Whenever the department, upon
investigation, becomes satisfied that a well, spring or other supply of
water, used for domestic purposes, has become polluted so as to endanger
the public health, it is authorized to prohibit the person or
corporation owning or controlling said supply from furnishing such water
for domestic purposes, until it becomes satisfied that said water supply
has been purified and made fit for domestic use. Any person who
knowingly violates the order of the department is guilty of a class B
felony for each day he or she continues to furnish water after the order
of the department has been served on such person.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106. 2008, 161:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 485:35-a

 **485:35-a Protective Well Radii. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 215:3, eff.
Aug. 9, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 485:36

 **485:36 Injunctions to Enforce. –** The superior court shall have
jurisdiction in equity, upon application of the department, to enforce
the orders of the department issued under RSA 485:35.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:37

 **485:37 Fencing or Covering. –** No person who owns or occupies
land shall knowingly allow any well which is within 500 feet of a
dwelling or within 200 feet of any highway to remain open on such land,
unless there is around such well a substantial fence or protection at
least 3 feet high so constructed that no child can crawl through or
under it. Any such well shall be deemed to be open unless it is
protected by a covering strong enough to hold 1,000 pounds and secured
so that it cannot be easily removed by children. The term "well'' as
used in this subdivision shall mean any artificially made hole in the
surface of the earth (a) which is more than 4 feet deep and (b) which is
more than 8 inches in diameter and less than 16 square feet in area at
the top and (c) the sides of which are steeper than a 60 degree slope.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:38

 **485:38 Nuisance. –** Any open well which is not fenced or
protected as provided in RSA 485:37 is declared a nuisance and the same
may be ordered abated by any court of competent jurisdiction on
complaint of any prosecuting officer.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:39

 **485:39 Penalty. –** Whoever violates any provision of RSA 485:37
or RSA 485:38 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 485:40

 **485:40 Emergency Planning. –** The department shall develop plans,
with the advice and assistance of the division of homeland security and
emergency management, and of the public water systems of the state, for
emergency conditions and situations that may endanger the public health
or welfare by contamination of drinking water. Such plans may include
potential sources of contaminants and situations or conditions that
could place them in the sources of public drinking water, techniques and
methods to be used by public water systems to reduce or eliminate the
dangers to public health caused thereby, methods and times for analysis
or testing during such emergency conditions or situations, alternate
sources of water available to public water systems, and methods of
supplying drinking water to consumers if a public water system cannot
supply such water.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:71. 2002, 257:10. 2003, 319:128.
2004, 171:20. 2008, 361:15, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 485:41

 **485:41 Duties of Department. –** The department shall:
                                             
 I. Monitor the operation and maintenance of new and existing public
water systems and privately owned redistribution systems.
                                             
 II. Adopt rules governing the maintenance and operation of public
water systems to ensure compliance with drinking water standards and to
protect the public health.
                                             
 III. Adopt rules governing the installation of pipes, fixtures and
other apparatus which are used to connect the water system or privately
owned redistribution system to a building. Such rules shall be
considered minimum standards. The department shall adopt the
International Plumbing Code as published by the International Code
Council by reference, provided the department specifies which sections
of the code are in force in New Hampshire and makes specific any
discretionary provisions in the code subject to approval by the state
building code review board. The department shall periodically review the
rules adopted under this paragraph to assure that they are no less
stringent than the requirements of the current code.
                                             
 IV. Adopt rules establishing recordkeeping, reporting and testing
requirements for public water systems.
                                             
 V. Enter, and authorize its employees and agents to enter, the
premises of all public water systems and privately owned redistribution
systems for the purpose of carrying out inspection and for the purpose
of taking water samples, to determine compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or rules adopted under it, and to inspect any and all
records and facilities of such public water supply or privately owned
redistribution system in order to determine compliance with this chapter
and rules adopted under it.
                                             
 VI. Undertake long-range planning and studies, within available
state and federal funding, relating to the purity of drinking water in
the state.
                                             
 VII. Make available to the public the analytical results of all
monitoring and testing undertaken pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Adopt a fee system in recognition of services provided by the
water supply engineering bureau including the issuance of an operational
permit for public water systems subject to this chapter. The
commissioner shall adopt rules establishing the application process for
the issuance of operational permits pursuant to RSA 541-A. The fee
category for community systems per year shall be 
                                             $300, but in no case
shall the fee exceed 
                                             $10 per household or household equivalent. The fee
category for non-transient and non-community systems shall be 
                                             $150 per
year. All fees shall be paid to the department for deposit in the
operational permits account. Moneys in the operational permits account
shall be used to pay the salaries, benefits and expenses of the staff in
the department's drinking water supply program. Any revenues generated
in excess of the costs of funding the drinking water supply program's
expenses, shall lapse to the general fund at the close of each fiscal
year to be used to offset the future general fund appropriation for the
water supply program.
                                             
 IX. Adopt rules applying to privately owned redistribution systems
requiring:
                                             
 (a) Periodic monitoring of coliform bacteria and public
notification, and remedial action in case of violation of bacterial
water quality standards, consistent with the rules which apply to public
water systems for such bacterial water quality standards.
                                             
 (b) Retention of a primary water operator who maintains an
operating certificate at a minimum grade 1-A level.
                                             
 (c) Inspection and maintenance of exterior pumping stations,
distribution networks, and exterior storage tanks.
                                             
 (d) Design standards for new and replacement facilities
consistent with the rules which apply to public water systems as limited
by the provisions of RSA 485 concerning privately owned redistribution
systems, and provided that such rules require that any plans review
required by RSA 485 shall be completed within 30 days of the submission
of such plans.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 163:4. 1991, 380:3. 1996, 228:72, 106.
2002, 8:9. 2008, 279:6-9, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 485:42

 **485:42 Variances and Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. The department may, after notice and opportunity for hearing,
grant one or more variances from an applicable state drinking water
regulation to a public water system if the variance will not result in
an unreasonable risk to the public health, and if:
                                             
 (a) Because of the characteristics of the raw water sources
reasonably available to the system, the system cannot meet the maximum
contaminant levels of such drinking water regulation despite application
of the best available technology, treatment techniques or other means.
The department's finding of the best available technology treatment,
treatment technique or other means may vary depending upon the number of
persons served by the system or for other physical conditions related to
engineering feasibility and cost of compliance with maximum contaminant
levels as considered appropriate by the department; or
                                             
 (b) Where a specified treatment technique for a contaminant is
required by the state drinking water regulations, the system
demonstrates to the department's satisfaction that such treatment
technique is not required to protect the public health because of the
nature of the raw water source. Variances may be conditioned on
monitoring, testing, analyzing or other requirements to ensure the
protection of the public health, and variances granted under
subparagraph (a) shall include a compliance schedule under which the
public water system will meet each contaminant level for which a
variance is granted as expeditiously as is feasible.
                                             
 II. The department may, after notice and opportunity for hearing,
grant one or more exemptions from an applicable maximum contaminant
level or treatment technique in the state drinking water rules to a
public water system if:
                                             
 (a) The exemption will not result in an unreasonable risk to the
public health;
                                             
 (b) The public water system is unable to comply with the rule due
to compelling factors, which may include economic factors; and
                                             
 (c) The public water system was in operation on the earliest
effective date, under present or prior law, of the contaminant level or
treatment technique requirement. Each exemption shall be conditioned on
monitoring, testing, analyzing or other requirements to ensure the
protection of the public health, and shall include a compliance schedule
under which the public water system will meet each contaminant level or
treatment technique for which an exemption is granted as expeditiously
as is feasible, but not later than 12 months after the date of issuance
of the exemption. The department may extend the final date for
compliance provided in any schedule required under this section for a
period not to exceed 3 years after the date of the issuance of the
exemption if the public water system establishes that:
                                             
 (1) The system cannot meet the standard without capital
improvements which cannot be completed within the period of such
exemption;
                                             
 (2) In the case of a system which needs financial assistance
for the necessary improvements, the system has entered into an agreement
to obtain such financial assistance; or
                                             
 (3) The system has entered into an enforceable agreement to
become part of a regional public water system; and the system is taking
all practicable steps to meet the standards.
                                             
If a system serves fewer than 500 service connections and needs
financial assistance for necessary improvements, an exemption granted
under subparagraph (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this subparagraph may be renewed
for one or more additional 2-year periods, if the system establishes
that it is taking all practicable steps to meet the requirements of any
compliance schedule established under this section.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:43

 **485:43 Notification of Noncompliance; Water Quality. –**
                                             
 I. A public water system shall, upon granting of a variance or
exemption or upon determination of its noncompliance with any primary
drinking water standard or any rule adopted under this chapter or with
any other requirement of this chapter notify the department of such
noncompliance within 48 hours and shall notify its users of such
noncompliance in accordance with rules adopted by the department under
RSA 485:3.
                                             
 II. Each community public water system shall annually notify each of
its users of the results of water quality tests required by RSA 485:41.
Such notification shall be in the form prescribed by rule adopted by the
commissioner, pursuant to RSA 541-A, under RSA 485:3, VII. Such
notification shall include, but not be limited to, a listing of
contaminants identified under rules adopted pursuant to RSA 485:3, I,
and the results of testing for various bacteriological agents. Where
multiple tests have been conducted, a summary or average level of
contaminants or biological agents may be provided.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, 110, eff. July 1, 1996.

Laboratory Accreditation
------------------------

### Section 485:44

 **485:44 Water Testing Laboratory Accreditation. –**
                                             
 I. Any laboratory conducting water analysis tests for the purpose of
determining compliance of a public water supply with the provisions of
RSA 485:3 and any laboratory conducting environmental analyses in this
state for any other governmental purpose where a requirement of
certification or accreditation is specified shall first obtain
accreditation.
                                             
 II. The department shall establish and administer a program to
accredit on an annual basis the facilities, equipment, procedures,
methods of analysis, analytical assurance and quality control,
recordkeeping and traceability, analytical performance, and
qualifications of personnel of any laboratory for the purposes of RSA
485:44, I. The program shall be in conformance with and consistent with
the national accreditation standards approved by the National
Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Conference. The purpose of the
accreditation program shall be to ensure that environmental laboratories
provide sufficiently accurate, precise, and consistent results of tests,
analyses, and measurements.
                                             
 III. The department shall, upon request of a laboratory accredited
pursuant to paragraph II of this section, accredit such laboratory in
conformance with and consistent with the national accreditation
standards approved by the National Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Conference, provided that such laboratory demonstrates
capability to analyze samples with precision and accuracy.
                                             
 IV. A laboratory may subcontract tests which it is not accredited to
perform to another laboratory which is so accredited, provided that the
test report clearly indicates which tests were subcontracted and that
laboratory test records which specify the name and address of the
laboratory which performed the work are maintained and made accessible
to the department upon request.
                                             
 V, VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. The department shall accredit laboratories accredited in other
states upon request by reciprocity, provided that the accreditation
program in such states is in conformance with and consistent with the
national accreditation standards approved by the National Environmental
Laboratory Accreditation Conference.
                                             
 VIII. An alternate laboratory test method may be acceptable only if
it is in conformance with and consistent with the performance based
method requirements set forth in the national accreditation standards
approved by the National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation
Conference.
                                             
 IX. Accreditation may be denied, revoked, suspended, or modified as
determined by rules of the department. A laboratory which has had
accreditation revoked or suspended shall be reaccredited at such time as
it again meets criteria for accreditation provided, that such laboratory
has not had its accreditation revoked or suspended more than 3 times in
the preceding 2 years. Upon notification of the fourth such revocation
or suspension, such laboratory shall not be eligible for reaccreditation
for one year from the date of such notice, except that, upon appeal by
such laboratory, the commissioner may waive such extended period of
revocation or suspension if such laboratory can demonstrate to the
commissioner good cause for the immediate reaccreditation of such
laboratory.
                                             
 X. Changes in laboratory ownership, location, personnel,
methodology, or other factors significantly affecting the performance of
analyses for which it was originally accredited shall be reported in
writing to the accreditation officer of the department within 5 business
days of the change.
                                             
 XI. The department shall establish by rule, under RSA 541-A, a
reasonable time frame for the completion of the accreditation process.
The provisions under which any laboratory is certified on January 1,
1990 shall not be affected in any way, except as provided in paragraph
IX of this section, before the completion of the accreditation process
within the time frame established by the department.
                                             
 XII. Participation of laboratories in the accreditation program
shall be voluntary.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1992, 191:1, 2. 1996, 228:73. 1998, 152:2-4, 8,
I, eff. Aug. 7, 1998.

### Section 485:45

 **485:45 Testing of Water Supplies. –** The state laboratory shall
make periodic inspections and analyses of the public water supplies of
the state and any special investigations of such water supplies that may
be called for; also, when requested or as may be deemed by them
necessary or expedient in the interests of the public health, make
inspections or analyses of sources furnishing water to institutions,
schools, hotels, camps, other places of public resort and individuals,
and advise in connection with the same.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:46

 **485:46 Fees; Advertising. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A, after public
hearing, establishing a schedule of reasonable fees to be paid by any
laboratory applying for accreditation.
                                             
 II. The schedule of fees shall be designed to recover the costs
associated with the accreditation services provided under RSA 485:44,
and such fees shall be available to the department to be used to defray
the expenses for such services. Funds received shall be deposited in a
special revolving fund account maintained by the department which shall
be continuously appropriated to the department to offset the costs of
the accreditation program. Any balance in excess of 
                                             $1,000 remaining at
the end of the fiscal year shall lapse to the general fund.
                                             
 III. A laboratory shall provide each prospective New Hampshire
client with a list which clearly indicates the specific analytes which
the laboratory is accredited to test. In the event that a client has
paid a fee to a laboratory in anticipation of testing services before
the receipt of said test sampling materials, and the client subsequently
determines upon receipt of the test materials that the laboratory is not
accredited to provide testing services to meet the client's needs, the
client may cancel the order for any testing services which have not yet
been performed, and the laboratory shall make full refund to the client.
Test reports shall clearly identify those specific analytes for which a
laboratory has accreditation and shall specifically identify any
analyses which were subcontracted to other laboratories.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1992, 191:3. 1998, 152:5, eff. Aug. 7, 1998.

### Section 485:47

 **485:47 Rulemaking. –** The department shall adopt rules, under RSA
541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures and standards for accreditation of laboratories,
including but not limited to the form and content of approval and
accreditation application forms, analytical techniques to be employed,
standard collection and testing procedures, performance on proficiency
test samples, as well as qualifications for laboratory personnel. The
procedures and standards shall be in conformance with and consistent
with the national accreditation standards approved by the National
Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Conference.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Procedures and conditions under which accreditation of water
testing laboratories may be revoked, suspended, or modified.
                                             
 IV. Information to be disclosed when tests are subcontracted.
                                             
 V. Procedures and criteria for laboratory reaccreditation.
                                             
 VI. Procedures for the accreditation of laboratories which have been
accredited by other states.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for approval of alternate testing methodology.
                                             
 VIII. Fees for accreditation, including rules for accounting of the
fees.
                                             
 IX. Procedures and standards for testing of water under any expanded
accreditation program.
                                             
 X. A time frame for the completion of the accreditation process.
                                             
 XI-XIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1998, 152:6-8, II, III, eff. Aug. 7, 1998.

Wellhead Protection
-------------------

### Section 485:48

 **485:48 Wellhead Protection. –** The department may institute a
wellhead protection program as described in section 1428 of the federal
Safe Drinking Water Amendments of 1986. The program shall be consistent
with the provisions of RSA 485-C and shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
                                             
 I. Determination of the responsibilities of state and local
government units, and those of public drinking water supply systems with
respect to wellhead protection.
                                             
 II. Determination of the extent of the wellhead protection area,
based on reasonably available hydrogeologic data, groundwater flow,
recharge, discharge, and other data the department deems necessary to
such determination.
                                             
 III. Identify within each wellhead protection area all potential
anthropogenic sources of contaminants which may have any adverse effect
on human health, through consideration of all potential sources of such
contaminants.
                                             
 IV. Technical assistance, financial assistance, implementation of
control measures, education, training, and demonstration projects to
protect the water supply within wellhead protection areas from such
contaminants.
                                             
 V. Contingency plans for the location and provision of alternate
drinking water supplies for each public water system in the event of
well or wellfield contamination by such contaminants.
                                             
 VI. Procedures, including, but not limited to, the establishment of
technical and citizens' advisory committees, to encourage the public to
participate in developing the protection program for wellhead areas.
Such procedures shall include notice and opportunity for public hearing
on the state program before it is submitted to the administrator, United
States Environmental Protection Agency, for approval.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1991, 344:2. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

Future Supplies of Water for Domestic Use
-----------------------------------------

### Section 485:49

 **485:49 Declaration of Need. –** It is declared that there is
statewide need for long-range planning in order that the health and
safety of the people of the state may be protected in respect to
adequate water supplies for domestic use.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:50

 **485:50 Domestic Water Supply Study. –** The department of
environmental services is authorized and directed to study the probable
domestic water supply requirements of groups of towns or cities, or
both, which appear likely to have increased industrial and population
growths for the next 50 years. In connection with said studies the
department shall determine the most feasible and economic sites for
sources of water supply for such long-range planning.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:51

 **485:51 Assistance. –** The department of environmental services is
authorized, within the limits of the appropriations made therefor, to
employ engineers and other assistants to make the studies authorized by
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:52

 **485:52 Reports. –** Whenever any study of a group plan for
domestic water supply projects is made the department of environmental
services shall report the same to the next session of the legislature
together with its recommendations to make secure the availability of
those sites which the department of environmental services finds will
best meet the future needs of the particular locality studied.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:53

 **485:53 Advice to Municipalities. –** Upon request the department
of environmental services shall consult with and advise any municipality
which is considering a change in its domestic water supply due to an
approaching critical situation in the municipality.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Protection of Sources of Ice
----------------------------

### Section 485:54

 **485:54 Ice Cutting. –** No person shall cut or take ice from any
lake, pond or reservoir used as the source of a domestic public water
supply, unless he shall first comply in all respects with such
reasonable rules regarding the manner and place of such cutting and
taking as may be prescribed by the local legislative body, or officers
of a water company, who may have charge of the works of any city or town
supplying its inhabitants with water from such source.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 485:55

 **485:55 Ice; Penalty. –** Any person who knowingly or willfully
shall cut or take ice for domestic purposes from any waters which are
polluted with sewage or other substance deleterious or dangerous to life
or health, or from waters which a board of health, local health officer
or the department has condemned, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:56

 **485:56 Ice Inspection. –** Health officers of the cities and towns
of the state, and the department of environmental services, shall
examine and inspect the sources from which ice is cut, or is proposed to
be cut, for domestic use in such cities and towns, and to employ any
necessary means to determine whether the waters of such sources of ice
supply have been polluted, or whether ice taken from such sources will
be deleterious to the public health.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:108, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:57

 **485:57 Ice; Notice of Pollution. –** If the waters of the sources
of ice supplies shall be found so polluted that the ice taken from those
sources will be unsafe for domestic use, the local health officer or the
department of environmental services shall immediately notify such
person who may have taken, or who proposes to take, ice from such
polluted source for domestic use, of the dangerous character of the
waters inspected, and that the taking of such ice for domestic use must
cease.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:108, eff. July 1, 1996.

Enforcement; Appeals
--------------------

### Section 485:58

 **485:58 Enforcement and Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. If the department determines that a primary standard has
violated, or that, in its judgment, a condition exists in a public water
system which will cause a violation of a primary standard and may result
in a serious risk to public health, it may issue an order requiring:
                                             
 (a) The prohibition of transportation, sale, distribution or
supplying of water;
                                             
 (b) The repair, installation or operation of purification
equipment or methods;
                                             
 (c) The notification of all potential users of the system,
including travelers, of the nature, extent and possible health effects
of the imminent hazard, and precautions to be taken by users; or
                                             
 (d) The testing, sampling or other analytical operations required
to determine the nature, extent, duration or termination of the imminent
hazard.
                                             
The superior court shall place any action filed by the department to
enforce an order under this section at the top of its calendar of cases
and shall provide an expeditious hearing on such order.
                                             
 II. Any reckless violation of any provision of this chapter, any
rule adopted under this chapter, any term or condition of an approval,
exemption, variance or order issued under this chapter, or any
misstatement of a material fact required to be disclosed under this
chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor for a natural person and a felony
for any other person.
                                             
 III. Unless otherwise provided, any purposeful or knowing violation
of any provision of this chapter, any rule adopted under this chapter,
any term or condition of an approval, exemption, variance, or order
issued under this chapter, or any misstatement of a material fact
required to be disclosed under this chapter shall constitute a class B
felony.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any
rule adopted or any term or condition of an approval, exemption,
variance or order issued under this chapter shall be liable to the
state, upon suit brought by the attorney general, for a civil forfeiture
in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $25,000 for each day of such violation.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of environmental services, after notice and
hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative fine not to
exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates any
provision of this chapter including any rule adopted under the
provisions of this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of
the commissioner under this paragraph shall be in accordance with RSA
541. Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not
preclude the imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The
proceeds of administrative fines levied pursuant to this paragraph shall
be deposited by the department in the general fund. The commissioner
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this paragraph for violations of this chapter as provided above.
                                             
 (b) Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine.
                                             
 VI. Any act or failure to act in violation of RSA 485:8, II; 31; 42;
43; 46; or 48; or any rule adopted under RSA 485:2; 3; 4; 40; 41; 44; or
47 may be enjoined.
                                             
 VII. Notwithstanding RSA 651:2, any person may, in addition to any
sentence of imprisonment, probation or conditional discharge, be fined
not more than 
                                             $25,000 if found guilty of any violation of paragraph II
or III of this section. The court may also order the person to pay the
costs of remediation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 33:2. 1995, 88:2; 217:6. 1996, 228:106.
2009, 210:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 485:59

 **485:59 Appeals. –** Actions of the department under RSA 485:1-4;
8, II; 31; 41-44; 46-48, or 58, I may be appealed under RSA 21-O:14.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1995, 88:3. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 485:60

 **485:60 Special Acts. –** Nothing in this chapter shall repeal any
special act applying to cities and towns.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Rules for Water Conservation
----------------------------

### Section 485:61

 **485:61 Rules for Water Conservation. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, for
water conservation practices for water users. These rules shall strike a
reasonable balance between environmental, energy, and economic impacts
and be consistent with current industry standards and practices for
different types of water users.
                                             
 II. The water conservation rules in paragraph I of this section
shall apply to all new permit applicants and applications for water
withdrawals subject to the provisions of RSA 485:3, RSA 485:48, RSA
485-C:21 and section 401 of the Clean Water Act.
                                             
 III. Water conservation rules shall be consistent with applicable
state or federal rules and regulations.

**Source.** 2002, 142:2, eff. July 12, 2002.
