---
title: 'CHAPTER 486-A AID TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS'
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 486-A
                                             
AID TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS
---------------------------

### Section 486-A:1

 **486-A:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to provide a
state contribution to aid all public water systems in achieving
compliance with the requirements of the surface water treatment rules of
the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, to provide a state contribution to
aid public water systems in the formation or improvement of regional
water systems that provide a benefit to public health, safety, and
economic well-being, to provide a state contribution to aid public water
systems in the evaluation of the groundwater contributing area of public
wells that have recorded levels of chemical contaminants, excluding
MTBE, and to protect sources of public drinking water that serve
community or non-transient non-community water systems and associated
natural resources through the acquisition of land or conservation
easements within source water protection areas.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:2

 **486-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Construction'' means:
                                             
 (a) The installation or building of:
                                             
 (1) New wells or well buildings;
                                             
 (2) Filtration systems and associated pump stations, pump
equipment, chemical treatment systems, telemetry and metering equipment,
and storage tanks; and
                                             
 (3) Distribution mains and valves needed to interconnect the
new wells or filtration system to the existing system as may be required
by the department and the EPA or to interconnect public water systems to
form a regional water system.
                                             
 (b) Altering, improving or adding to existing water treatment or
water source, storage or transmission main facilities or regional water
system interconnections in order to meet the requirements of the surface
water treatment rules or to meet the water needs of a regional water
system.
                                             
 (c) Engineering services related to the activities identified
under this paragraph, including the scientific evaluation of the
groundwater contributing area of public wells with recorded levels of
chemical contaminants, excluding MTBE, using a method approved by the
department.
                                             
 I-a. "Community water system'' means a community water system as
defined in RSA 485:1-a, I.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 III. "Eligible surface water treatment costs'' means the actual cost
of construction and related services necessary for a municipality to
comply with the surface water treatment rules of the department of
environmental services and the EPA, but shall not include the
following:
                                             
 (a) Land acquisition, except for land which shall be an integral
part of a well system or filtration system;
                                             
 (b) Easements and rights-of-way necessary to the project;
                                             
 (c) Distribution systems and any improvement thereto not
necessary for the municipality to achieve compliance with the surface
water treatment rules; and
                                             
 (d) Any administrative, legal, and fiscal costs related to the
project.
                                             
 III-a. "Eligible water supply land protection costs'' means the
actual cost of permanently conserving substantially undeveloped land
within one or more source water protection areas for active, proposed,
or future sources of public drinking water supplying a community or
non-transient non-community water system, including the cost of land or
conservation easement acquisition and associated legal and transaction
costs.
                                             
 III-b. "Eligible regional water system costs'' means that portion of
the costs of construction and related services attributable, as
determined by the department, or the entire cost of permanent
construction and related services attributable, as approved by the
department in accordance with the provisions of RSA 485:8, for
communities that qualify for United States Department of Agriculture
rural utilities water and wastewater program direct loans, guarantees,
and grants and public water systems that are eligible for any other
needs based federal assistance to the provision of water for domestic,
commercial, or fire protection purposes, whether as routine supply or
emergency reserve supply, through one or more of the interconnections
that form a regional water system, but shall not include any of the
following:
                                             
 (a) Land acquisition, except for land which shall be an integral
part of a well system or filtration system.
                                             
 (b) Easements and rights-of-way necessary to the project.
                                             
 (c) Distribution systems and any improvement thereto not
necessary for the municipality to achieve compliance with the surface
water treatment rules.
                                             
 (d) Administrative, legal, and fiscal costs related to the
project.
                                             
 III-c. "Eligible evaluation of the groundwater contribution area of
public wells that have recorded levels of chemical contaminants
excluding MTBE'' means that portion of the actual costs of scientific
evaluation of the contribution area of the sources of public drinking
water, such as a well or surface water intake, through which water is
likely to flow towards the source and related services attributable, as
determined by the department, to the provisions of water for domestic,
commercial, or fire protection purposes, whether as routine supply or
emergency backup supply, through one or more interconnections that form
a regional water system, but shall not include the following:
                                             
 (a) Land acquisition, except for land which shall be an integral
part of a well system or filtration system;
                                             
 (b) Easements and rights-of-way necessary to the project;
                                             
 (c) Distribution systems and any improvement thereto not
necessary for the municipality to achieve compliance with the surface
water treatment rules; and
                                             
 (d) Any administrative, legal, and fiscal costs related to the
project.
                                             
 IV. "EPA'' means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
                                             
 IV-a. "Future source of public drinking water supply'' means:
                                             
 (a) Stratified-drift aquifer areas identified by the department
as favorable gravel well areas not constrained by existing development;
and
                                             
 (b) Other groundwater resources identified by the department as
high-yielding aquifer areas not constrained by existing development.
                                             
 V. "Non-transient non-community water system'' means a non-transient
non-community water system as defined in RSA 485:1-a, XI.
                                             
 V-a. "Regional water system'' means the system which results from
the interconnection of 2 or more discrete public water systems to
provide routine or emergency reserve supply.
                                             
 V-b. "Groundwaters'' means all areas below the top of the water
table, including aquifers, wells, and other sources of groundwater.
                                             
 VI. "Source water protection area'' means the area around a source
of public drinking water, such as a well or surface water intake,
through which water is likely to flow towards the source.
                                             
 VII. "Stewardship'' means ongoing surveillance of water supply
protection land acquired pursuant to this chapter to ensure that the
conservation intent is maintained.
                                             
 VIII. "Water supply land protection grantee'' means an entity that
receives a water supply land protection grant to acquire and maintain in
perpetuity land or easements for the purpose of protecting a drinking
water source. A water supply land protection grantee shall be a
nonprofit organization exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code and having public water supply or land
conservation as its principal mission or a municipality.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 1996, 228:94, 106. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:2-4.
2008, 279:10. 2009, 227:1-3, eff. July 16, 2009.

### Section 486-A:3

 **486-A:3 State Contribution; Surface Water Treatment Costs; Water
Supply Land Protection Costs; Regional Water System Costs. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Any public water system which is or was required, beginning
in 1986, to achieve compliance with the surface water treatment rules of
the EPA or the rules of the New Hampshire department of environmental
services adopted to implement the federal Safe Drinking Water Act
amendments of 1986 shall be eligible for a state contribution. As its
contribution, the state shall pay 20 percent of the annual amortization
charges, meaning the principal and interest, on the eligible surface
water treatment costs resulting from the construction of new wells or a
filtration system to meet the requirements of the surface water
treatment rules.
                                             
 (b) To be eligible under RSA 486-A:3, I(a), construction shall be
necessary in order for the public water system to comply with the
surface water treatment rules of the department or the EPA, or both.
Plans for construction shall be approved in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 485:8.
                                             
 II. The state may pay up to 25 percent of the eligible water supply
land protection costs.
                                             
 III. Any public water system which incurs eligible regional water
system costs or eligible evaluation of contributing area of groundwaters
contribution to public wells that have recorded levels of chemical
contaminants costs, excluding MTBE, after the effective date of this
paragraph shall be eligible for a state contribution in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. As its contribution, the state shall pay
25 percent of the annual amortization charges, meaning the principal and
interest, on the bonded eligible regional water system costs, or 25
percent of non-bonded, eligible regional water system costs. Plans for
construction shall be approved in accordance with the provisions of RSA
485:8.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 1996, 228:106. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:5, 6,
eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:4

 **486-A:4 Additional State Contribution. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to any other state contribution provided in this
chapter, the commissioner of the department, with the approval from the
governor and council, may, upon review of plans submitted by a public
water system and within the limits of available appropriations, pay 10
percent of the annual amortization charges, meaning principal and
interest, on the eligible surface water treatment costs resulting from
the installation and construction of water supply facilities required by
the surface water treatment rules of the Safe Drinking Water Act.
                                             
 II. This additional contribution may be provided when such
installation or construction will result in user fees that are 20
percent above the statewide average for residential customers.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 2000, 310:1, eff. June 21, 2000.

### Section 486-A:5

 **486-A:5 Equitable Allocation of Costs. –** The department shall
not approve any contribution for surface water treatment or for the
formation or improvement of a regional water system or for evaluation of
contribution of groundwaters to public wells that have record levels of
chemical contaminants, excluding MTBE under this chapter unless it shall
first have determined that the applicant:
                                             
 I. Has adopted or will adopt a system of charges to assure that each
recipient of water service within the applicant's jurisdiction, as
determined by the department, will pay its proportionate share of the
costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of water
services provided by the applicant. For a regional water system project,
the department must also determine that each public water system that is
to make payments to the applicant for water service provided through
area regional water system interconnection has adopted or will adopt a
system of charges to assure that each recipient of water service within
the public water system will pay its proportionate share of the such
payments.
                                             
 II. Has legal, institutional, managerial, and financial capability
to ensure adequate construction, operation, and maintenance of water
works throughout the applicant's jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 1996, 228:106. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:7, eff.
July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:6

 **486-A:6 Application for Funding. –** Application for payments
under the provisions of this chapter shall be made in accordance with
rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A, and, for surface
water treatment projects and regional water system projects and
evaluation of groundwaters contributing area of public wells, shall be
based upon reports filed with the commissioner prior to January 31, in
the calendar year for which payment is being requested.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 1996, 228:110. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:8, eff.
July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:7

 **486-A:7 Applicant Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. Applications for state grants for surface water treatment and for
regional water systems and evaluation of groundwaters contributing area
of public wells with recorded levels of chemical contaminants shall
contain an agreement that the applicant:
                                             
 (a) Has installed or will install the water works facilities in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
department;
                                             
 (b) Will provide proper and efficient operation and maintenance
of facilities;
                                             
 (c) Agrees that failure to install the facilities in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications or to provide proper and
efficient operation and maintenance of such facilities shall result in
loss of payments of the annual grant installment next following such
failure. The loss of payment of the annual grant installment shall
continue in effect until such time as the applicant has completed the
steps necessary to install the facilities in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the department, or made provisions for proper
and efficient operation and maintenance of the facilities in accordance
with department instructions or both;
                                             
 (d) For a grant to aid in the development of a regional water
system and evaluation of groundwaters contributing area of public wells
with recorded levels of chemical contaminants, agrees to participate in
regional and statewide water supply planning initiatives and to consider
the results of such initiatives for purposes of long-term water supply
planning and infrastructure development.
                                             
 II. Applications for water supply land protection grants shall
contain a statement that the applicant shall comply with the following
conditions:
                                             
 (a) The applicant shall purchase the land or conservation
easement from a willing seller, and the purchase shall include only land
within the source water protection area of an active or proposed public
drinking water source supplying a community or non-transient
non-community water system or only small portions of land beyond the
source water protection area under circumstances which make subdivision
impractical;
                                             
 (b) The land or conservation easement shall be owned, in
perpetuity, by a water supply land protection grantee;
                                             
 (c) The land shall be maintained in perpetuity to protect the
drinking water source and no land use or development shall occur that
would diminish the quantity or quality of the drinking water;
                                             
 (d) The land, if purchased in fee simple, shall not be posted to
prohibit hiking, hunting, and fishing, unless the department deems such
posting necessary to protect the associated water supply or other
natural resources;
                                             
 (e) The applicant shall provide required stewardship and submit
annual stewardship reports to the department.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 1996, 228:106. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:9, eff.
July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:8

 **486-A:8 Priority of Applications. –**
                                             
 I. For surface water treatment projects, the department shall
establish and maintain a priority list of projects eligible to receive
grants under RSA 486-A:3. The priority list shall include the highest
priority projects ready for construction and anticipated to receive
grants from appropriated funds within the next fiscal year. The list
required by this section shall not be considered rules subject to the
provisions of RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. For water supply land protection projects, the department shall
prioritize projects in accordance with rules established under RSA
486-A:11. Prioritization factors shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Distance from and relation to the drinking water source.
                                             
 (b) Size of the area proposed for protection relative to the size
of the source water protection area.
                                             
 (c) Natural resource values, including wetlands, habitat
protection, and recreational uses.
                                             
 (d) Current protection status of the source water protection
area.
                                             
 (e) Ability of the applicant to pay for water supply land
protection.
                                             
 III. For regional water system projects and evaluation of
groundwaters contributing area of public wells with recorded levels of
chemical contaminants, the department shall adopt prioritization factors
by rule under RSA 541-A, to assist in determining which new projects to
fund under this chapter. Prioritization factors shall include, but not
be limited to:
                                             
 (a) The population of the service area that would receive water
through the regional water system interconnection.
                                             
 (b) The degree to which the public's health, safety, and economic
well-being will benefit.
                                             
 (c) The fiscal impact on user fees and taxes in the area of the
regional water system.
                                             
 (d) The consistency with land use master plans in the affected
municipalities and with the provisions of RSA 9-B and RSA 162-C:2, V, to
the extent that a proposed regional water system project may impact the
municipality's growth and development patterns.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 2000, 310:1. 2003, 178:10, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:8-a

 **486-A:8-a Public Notice. –**
                                             
 I. For surface water treatment projects, regional water system
projects, and evaluation of groundwaters contributing area of public
wells with recorded levels of chemical contaminants the commissioner of
environmental services or designee shall hold an annual public hearing
to receive testimony on the projects recommended by the department, in
accordance with RSA 486-A:8, to receive grants in the next fiscal year.
After considering the testimony offered at the hearing, the commissioner
shall finalize the priority list for the next fiscal year, and project
assistance shall be granted accordingly.
                                             
 II. The department shall provide notice by certified mail to the
municipality in which the land is located of each water supply land
protection project recommended by the department, in accordance with RSA
486-A:8, to receive a grant, and shall wait 20 days for a hearing
request. Upon request of the governing body of the municipality in which
the land is located, the commissioner of environmental services or
designee shall hold a public hearing to receive testimony on any project
recommended to receive a grant. The department shall provide notice of
any such hearing at least 30 days prior to the hearing by notices posted
in at least one public place in the municipality and in at least 2
newspapers of general circulation in the region, and by certified mail
to the governing body of the municipality. After considering the
testimony offered at all of the public hearings requested for that
year's recommended projects, the commissioner shall finalize the
priority list for the next fiscal year, and project assistance shall be
granted accordingly. If no hearing is requested, the department shall
select projects for funding without a public hearing.

**Source.** 2000, 310:2. 2003, 178:11, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 486-A:9

 **486-A:9 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall perform the following functions related to
the administration of the provisions of this chapter applicable to
surface water treatment and to any regional water system and evaluation
of groundwaters contributing area of public wells with recorded levels
of chemical contaminants:
                                             
 (a) Assist public water systems to:
                                             
 (1) Develop an acceptable grant application for funding under
RSA 486-A.
                                             
 (2) Conduct pre-construction conferences.
                                             
 (b) Review the defined project and confirm that it meets the
surface water treatment rule requirements of the state of New Hampshire
and the EPA in accordance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R., part 141,
subpart H.
                                             
 (c) Review and approve preliminary and final facilities' plans
for the defined project.
                                             
 (d) Review construction plans and specifications in accordance
with RSA 485:8.
                                             
 (e) Process grant applications for state approval.
                                             
 (f) Approve construction plans and specifications and issue
authorizations to advertise contracts for bids.
                                             
 (g) Review and approve any revisions to plans and specifications
prior to formal advertisement by the public water system.
                                             
 (h) Review and approve formal addenda to plans and specifications
during the formal advertising process.
                                             
 (i) Review bid documentation to establish the low responsive and
responsible bidder.
                                             
 (j) Issue authorization to award the construction contract to the
lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
                                             
 (k) Perform periodic site inspections to ensure compliance with
executed construction contract documents.
                                             
 (l) Review and approve operation and maintenance manuals.
                                             
 (m) Review and approve change orders during the construction
period.
                                             
 (n) Review all invoices related to the project submitted to the
grantee on a monthly basis.
                                             
 (o) Conduct a final inspection of completed facilities and
certify substantial completion.
                                             
 (p) Based upon a satisfactory final project inspection, review
and approve final eligible surface water treatment costs, regional water
system project costs and evaluation costs of groundwaters contributing
area of public wells with recorded levels of chemical contaminants, and
authorize release of retainage.
                                             
 (q) Evaluate the defined project for consistency with municipal
master planning, RSA 9-B, and RSA 162-C:2, V and require limitations on
future water system connections where appropriate.
                                             
 (r) For a regional water system project and evaluation of
groundwaters contributing area of public wells with recorded levels of
contaminants, evaluate the defined project to ensure that it is designed
to provide an overall benefit to public health, safety, and economic
well-being and that it is a cost-effective means of achieving these
benefits.
                                             
 II. The department shall perform the following functions related to
the administration of this chapter applicable to water supply land
protection grants:
                                             
 (a) Assist applicants with water supply land protection grant
applications.
                                             
 (b) Review defined projects and confirm that they meet
eligibility criteria.
                                             
 (c) Prioritize projects in accordance with the procedures
established under RSA 486-A:8.
                                             
 (d) Select projects for funding and administer grant funds.
                                             
 (e) Review all invoices related to the project submitted to the
department by the grantee.
                                             
 (f) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1993, 341:1. 1996, 228:106. 2000, 310:3. 2003, 178:12-14,
eff. July 1, 2003. 2015, 259:31, III, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 486-A:10

 **486-A:10 Notice to Public Utilities Commission. –** Any public
water system regulated by the public utilities commission shall notify
the public utilities commission when it receives funds under the
provisions of this chapter, to ensure that the money received is not
used in calculating rate setting.

**Source.** 1993, 341:1, eff. June 30, 1993.

### Section 486-A:11

 **486-A:11 Rulemaking. –** The department shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to providing water supply land
protection grants. Such rules shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Appraiser and surveyor standards.
                                             
 II. Eligibility determination criteria and procedures.
                                             
 III. Application requirements and procedures.
                                             
 IV. Project selection and prioritization requirements and
procedures.
                                             
 V. Stewardship requirements and procedures, including annual
reporting to the department by the grantee.

**Source.** 2000, 310:4, eff. June 21, 2000.

### Section 486-A:12

 **486-A:12 Water Supply Land Protection Grant Match. –** The percent
match supplied by the water supply land protection grantee for water
supply land protection projects shall consist of cash, expenses
necessary to complete the transaction including associated legal and
transaction costs, donations of source water protection lands or
conservation easements assessed at fair market value and protected in
perpetuity, or a combination of cash, transaction expenses, and such
donations. Gifts of land and interests in land must be held by a water
supply land protection grantee.

**Source.** 2000, 310:4, eff. June 21, 2000.

### Section 486-A:13

 **486-A:13 Public Trust. –**
                                             
 I. The lands and interests in lands acquired by the state or other
public entity with a water supply land protection grant under this
chapter shall be held in public trust and used and applied for the
purposes of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of law
relating to the disposal of publicly-owned real estate, no deviation in
the uses of any land or interest in land so acquired to uses or purposes
not consistent with the purposes of this chapter shall be permitted. The
sale, transfer, conveyance, or release of any such land or interest in
land from public trust is prohibited except when the conditions of RSA
486-A:13, II or III are met.
                                             
 II. Land may be released from public trust in order to be converted
to another use if:
                                             
 (a) The municipality, holding title to the land or conservation
easement proposed for release from the program, votes in favor of such a
release by a two-thirds vote of its legislative body;
                                             
 (b) A public hearing is held prior to the municipal vote, after
the municipality provides notice of such hearing at least 30 days prior
to the hearing by notices sent to the department, notices posted in at
least one public place in the municipality, certified notice to any
other municipality whose water supply might be affected by the proposed
release, and notices in at least 2 newspapers of general circulation in
the region;
                                             
 (c) All other municipalities using the water supply protected by
the land or conservation easement vote to release the land by a
two-thirds vote of their legislative bodies and after holding a public
hearing noticed according to the procedures set forth in subparagraph
(b);
                                             
 (d) The land proposed for release from the program will be
publicly owned after its release from the program; and
                                             
 (e) The municipality proposing to release the land or
conservation easement from the program repays the department the amount
of the water supply land protection grant plus interest compounded
annually at the rate of 10 percent, which repayment shall be used by the
department to further the water supply land protection purposes of this
chapter.
                                             
 III. Land may be released from public trust due to termination of
use if:
                                             
 (a) The grantee has successfully demonstrated to the department
that the source of drinking water that the land or conservation easement
is intended to protect is not and will not be viable due to the
inability to remediate contamination or to provide treatment which
improves water quality so that it is suitable for human consumption;
and
                                             
 (b) The municipality voting to release the land or conservation
easement from the program repays the department the amount of the water
supply land protection grant plus interest compounded annually at the
rate of 3.5 percent, which repayment shall be used by the department to
further the water supply land protection purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 310:4, eff. June 21, 2000.

### Section 486-A:14

 **486-A:14 Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department, after notice and hearing
pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative fine not to exceed

                                             $500 for each offense upon any person who violates the reporting
requirement of RSA 486-A:7, II(e). Rehearings and appeals from a
decision of the commissioner under this paragraph shall be in accordance
with RSA 541. The commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A,
relative to procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine.
                                             
 II. The proceeds of administrative fines levied pursuant to
paragraph I shall be used by the department to further the water supply
land protection purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 310:4, eff. June 21, 2000.

### Section 486-A:15

 **486-A:15 Repayment Responsibility. –** Any party found, by means
of a scientific or hydrogeological study, or other evaluation as
approved by the department, of the groundwaters contributing area of
public wells with recorded levels of contaminants, to be responsible for
contaminating a wellhead area, shall be required to repay to the state,
the amount the state contributed for the evaluation.

**Source.** 2003, 178:16, eff. July 1, 2003.
