---
title: CHAPTER 487 CONTROL OF MARINE POLLUTION AND AQUATIC GROWTH
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 487
                                             
CONTROL OF MARINE POLLUTION AND AQUATIC GROWTH
----------------------------------------------

Marine Toilets and Disposal of Sewage From Boats
------------------------------------------------

### Section 487:1

 **487:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Boats'' means any vessel or watercraft whether moved by oars,
paddles, sails or other power mechanism, inboard or outboard, or any
other vessel or structure floating upon the water whether or not capable
of self locomotion, including but not limited to house boats, barges and
similar floating objects.
                                             
 I-a. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 III. "Graywater'' means galley, bath, and shower water.
                                             
 IV. "Marine toilet'' means any toilet on or within any boat as that
term is defined herein.
                                             
 V. "Sewage'' means human body wastes and graywater, plus wastes from
toilets, sinks, showers, and other receptacles intended to receive or
retain body wastes or graywater.
                                             
 VI. "Waters of this state'' means waters classified, or
unclassified, as defined in RSA 485-A.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:95, 96, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 487:2

 **487:2 Restrictions on Marine Toilets. –** No marine toilet on any
boat operated upon waters of the state shall be so constructed and
operated as to discharge any sewage into said waters either directly or
indirectly, nor shall any sewage or container of sewage be placed, left,
discharged or caused to be placed, left or discharged in or near any
waters of the state by any person at any time whether or not the owner,
operator, guest or occupant of a boat; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall prohibit such discharge to a municipal sewerage
system or to any adequate sewage disposal system on shore.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 487:3

 **487:3 Restrictions on Sinks and Showers. –** No sink or shower on
any boat operated upon the fresh waters of the state shall be so
constructed or operated as to discharge any graywater into said waters
either directly or indirectly.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 487:4

 **487:4 Responsibility of Marinas and Shore Property Owners. –**
                                             
 I. All owners and operators of any marina or shore property located
on fresh waters of the state shall cooperate with the department by
publicizing the requirements of this chapter among the boating
fraternity and other interested parties.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to new boats held
in inventory by marine dealers which are placed in fresh waters of the
state for demonstration purposes only; provided that toilets, sinks, or
showers on said new boats shall not be placed in commission and shall be
sealed and clearly posted to preclude their use.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 487:5

 **487:5 Rulemaking. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 138:6, IV, eff. Aug. 17,
2007.
                                             ]

### Section 487:6

 **487:6 Compliance. –** No person shall knowingly launch into the
fresh waters of the state any boat which is not equipped in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 487:7

 **487:7 Penalty; Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
of rules of the department adopted under this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person. If any fine is imposed it shall constitute a lien against the
boat on which the offense was committed whether or not the defendant is
also the registered owner or operator of said boat unless said boat was
used without permission of the owner.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of environmental services, after notice and
hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative fine not to
exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense, upon any person who violates any
provision of this chapter, any lawful rule of the department adopted
under this chapter, or any lawful order issued by the department
pursuant to this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the
commissioner under this paragraph shall be in accordance with RSA 541.
Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not preclude
the imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The proceeds of
administrative fines levied pursuant to this paragraph shall be
deposited by the department in the general fund. The commissioner shall
adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this paragraph for violations of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine.
                                             
 III. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, or
any lawful rule of the department adopted under this chapter, or who
shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any order lawfully issued
pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed 
                                             $10,000 per day of such violation.
                                             
 IV. The department shall issue a written cease and desist order
against any act in violation of this chapter or lawful rule of the
department adopted under this chapter, and any such act may be enjoined
by the superior court upon application of the attorney general.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1991, 63:1. 1996, 228:106. 1999, 204:1, 2, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 487:8

 **487:8 Enforcement. –** All boats located upon waters of this state
shall be subject to inspection by the department or any lawfully
designated agent or inspector of the department at any time for the
purpose of determining whether such boat is equipped in compliance with
this chapter. The members of the department, its agents and inspectors,
for these purposes shall have all the powers of a deputy sheriff
throughout the state.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:106, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 487:9

 **487:9 Required Registrations. –** No boat shall be operated upon
waters of this state having within or on it a marine toilet without a
certificate of registration from the department of safety, division of
motor vehicles, as required by RSA 270 and RSA 270-E.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 229:22, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 487:10

 **487:10 Suspension of Registration. –** If, upon said inspection it
shall appear that any marine toilet, sink, or shower within or on a boat
in operation on fresh waters of the state is so constructed as to permit
the discharge of any sewage to a surface water of the state contrary to
the provisions of this chapter, the member, agent, or inspector is
directed not later than 48 hours after such finding to require from the
owner, operator, or any person on board said boat, production and
surrender of its certificate and plate of registration. The owner,
operator, or any person on board shall have 48 hours from said
production and surrender of certificate and plate of registration within
which to remedy the defect. If, within said period the defect is
remedied, the certificate and registration shall be returned. If, at the
expiration of the 48 hours, the defect is not remedied, said member,
agent, or inspector shall then endorse in ink upon said certificate of
registration a brief statement of the nature of the violation and shall
forward it forthwith by mail or in person to the department of safety,
division of motor vehicles, where it shall be held by said division
until receipt of written authority from the commissioner for its return.
Such authority shall include a statement that the specified violation
has been remedied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
the rules of the department adopted under this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1996, 228:97, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 487:11

 **487:11 Appeal to Division; Notice and Hearing. –** Whenever the
person or occupant producing a certificate of registration which is
taken up for violation of this chapter is not also the registered owner,
that fact shall be made known to the department of safety, division of
motor vehicles, at the time of its delivery to said division, whereupon
it shall be the duty of the department of safety, division of motor
vehicles, to give notice in writing of the fact of suspension and the
reason for such suspension to the registered owner at the address
appearing upon said registration. Such notice shall be by registered
mail. Any registered owner whose certificate is suspended for violation
of this chapter shall have 10 days from receipt of actual notice of said
suspension to appeal to the division in protest of such suspension and
to request a hearing on the question of such suspension. In such
hearings the division shall have authority to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the taking of testimony under oath and shall preserve in
writing a summary of substantial evidence produced before it upon which
any decision in such cases is rendered. Decisions of the division under
this section shall be appealable pursuant to RSA 21-O:14. Nothing in
this section shall operate to reinstate any certificate of registration
pending a decision of the division other than by proof before it that
the violation of this chapter for which the registration certificate was
suspended no longer continues or by proof that no violation in fact
occurred.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 487:12

 **487:12 Operation After Suspension. –** No boat shall be operated
upon any waters of this state after its certificate of registration has
been taken up for violation of this chapter other than from the point at
which said certificate was taken up to a permanent mooring. For
violation of this section said certificate of registration shall be
revoked by the department of safety, division of motor vehicles, for a
period of not less than 12 months.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 487:13

 **487:13 Transfer of Title in Fraud of or After Suspension. –** Any
transfer of a boat, the registration certificate of which has been
suspended pursuant to this chapter, shall not operate to entitle the
transferee to a new registration certificate free of the restrictions
lawfully imposed under the provisions of this chapter, and any
transferee requesting a new registration for the same boat shall be
required to produce, as a condition precedent to such issuance, the
registration certificate of the transferer.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 487:14

 **487:14 Subsequent Registrations. –** Applications for original or
renewal of certificates of registration from the department of safety,
division of motor vehicles, shall contain a statement subject to the
penalties of perjury that the boat described in such application is
equipped in compliance with this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

New Hampshire Clean Lakes Program
---------------------------------

### Section 487:15


                                             


                                             [RSA 487:15 effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 487:15 set
out below.
                                             ]

 **487:15 Purpose. –**
                                             
 The general court recognizes that rapidly escalating pressures of
shorefront development and recreational uses of public waters have
placed increasing strains upon the state's lake resources, thereby
accelerating the eutrophication process in many of our public lakes
through nuisance growths of aquatic macrophyton and phytoplankton
(algae) and thus posing a threat to water quality. The general court
further recognizes the need to restore, preserve and maintain the
state's lakes and ponds in order that these significant environmental,
aesthetic and recreational assets will continue to benefit the social
and economic well-being of the state's citizens.


                                             [RSA 487:15 effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 487:15 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**487:15 Purpose.** --
                                             
 The general court recognizes that rapidly escalating pressures of
shorefront development and recreational uses of public waters have
placed increasing strains upon the state's lake resources, thereby
accelerating the eutrophicationprocess in many of our public lakes
through nuisance growths of aquatic macrophytes (aquatic plants) and
phytoplankton (algae) and thus posing a threat to water quality. The
general court further recognizes that transporting boats from one water
body to another increases the risk of inadvertent transport of aquatic
nuisance species, some of which are invisible to the unaided eye. This
risk can be reduced by inspecting and draining all boats and
water-related equipment upon leaving state waters. The general court
further recognizes the need to restore, preserve and maintain the
state's lakes and ponds in order that these significant environmental,
aesthetic and recreational assets will continue to benefit the social
and economic well-being of the state's citizens.

**Source.** 1990, 143:2, eff. June 18, 1990. 2016, 227:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 487:16

 **487:16 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 I-a. "Exotic aquatic species of wildlife'' means wildlife, as
defined in RSA 207:1, XXXV, that:
                                             
 (a) Depend on a freshwater aquatic environment; and
                                             
 (b) Are not naturally occurring in New Hampshire or have not
become established in New Hampshire as a result of an intentional
introduction program by a state agency.
                                             
 II. The term "exotic aquatic weeds'' includes only those species of
vascular aquatic plants which were not part of New Hampshire's native
aquatic flora before 1950. Cabomba caroliniana and Myriophyllum
heterophyllum are examples of exotic aquatic weeds.
                                             
 III. "Federal program'' means the federal Water Pollution Control
Act, 33 U.S.C.A. 1324, the federal clean lakes program (P.L. 92-500,
section 314), as amended, now known as the Water Quality Act of 1987
(P.L. 100-4), as amended.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.


                                             [Paragraph V effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 V. "Aquatic plants'' means plants that are adapted to live in
freshwater aquatic environments, also referred to as aquatic
macrophytes.

**Source.** 1990, 143:2. 1996, 228:98, 99. 1997, 185:2, eff. Jan. 1,
1998. 2015, 164:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2015. 2016, 227:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 487:16-a

 **487:16-a Exotic Aquatic Weed Prohibition. –** No exotic aquatic
weeds shall be offered for sale, distributed, sold, imported, purchased,
propagated, transported, or introduced in the state. The commissioner
may exempt any exotic aquatic weed from any of the prohibitions of this
section consistent with the purpose of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1997, 185:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 487:16-b


                                             


                                             [RSA 487:16-b effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 487:16-b
set out below.
                                             ]

 **487:16-b Exotic Aquatic Weed Penalties. –**
                                             
 It shall be unlawful to knowingly, recklessly, or purposely offer
for sale, distribute, sell, import, purchase, propagate, or introduce
exotic aquatic weeds into New Hampshire waterbodies. Notwithstanding RSA
487:7, any person engaging in such an activity shall be guilty of a
violation.


                                             [RSA 487:16-b effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 487:16-b set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**487:16-b Exotic Aquatic Weed Penalties.** --
                                             
 It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, distribute, sell, import,
purchase, propagate, negligently transport, or introduce exotic aquatic
weeds into New Hampshire waterbodies. Notwithstanding RSA 487:7, any
person engaging in such an activity shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1999, 204:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2016, 227:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 487:16-c


                                             


                                             [RSA 487:16-c effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **487:16-c Transport of Aquatic Plants or Exotic Aquatic Weeds On
Outside of Boats, Vehicles, and Equipment. –**
                                             
 No person shall negligently transport any aquatic plants or plant
parts or exotic aquatic weed or weed parts to or from any New Hampshire
waters on the outside of a vehicle, boat, ski craft as defined in RSA
270:73, trailer, or other equipment.

**Source.** 2016, 227:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 487:16-d


                                             


                                             [RSA 487:16-d effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **487:16-d Draining of Water Conveyances. –**
                                             
 I. When leaving waters of the state, a person shall drain his or her
boat and other water-related equipment that holds water, including live
wells and bilges.
                                             
 II. Drain plugs, bailers, valves, or other devices used to control
the draining of water from ballast tanks, bilges, and live wells shall
be removed or opened while transporting boats and other water-related
equipment, if the vessel is so equipped.
                                             
 III. Commercial enterprises transporting boats for off-site storage,
maintenance, or repairs, and emergency response vehicles and their
related equipment are exempted from paragraphs I and II, however all
such exempt commercial enterprises shall drain all water-related
equipment holding water and live wells and bilges prior to transporting
the equipment to another water body.

**Source.** 2016, 227:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 487:16-e


                                             


                                             [RSA 487:16-e effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **487:16-e Penalties. –**
                                             
 Notwithstanding RSA 487:7, any person who violates RSA 487:16-c
through 487:16-d shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of

                                             $50 for a first offense, 
                                             $100 for a second offense, and 
                                             $250 for any
subsequent offense. The authority to enforce these sections shall extend
to all peace officers in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2016, 227:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 487:17

 **487:17 Program Established. –**
                                             
 I. A program for the preservation and restoration of New Hampshire
lakes and ponds eligible under RSA 487:20 shall be established and
administered within the department of environmental services. Said
program shall function to limit the eutrophication process in New
Hampshire lakes by reducing nuisance growths of macrophyton and
phytoplankton. It shall reinforce and complement the program authorized
by the federal program and shall serve 3 basic purposes:
                                             
 (a) To diagnose degraded lakes and ponds and implement long-term
solutions for the purpose of restoring water quality where such
solutions are feasible and cost effective.
                                             
 (b) To diagnose lakes and ponds and implement methods for
long-term preservation of the water quality when such measures can be
shown to be feasible and cost effective.
                                             
 (c) To provide short-term remedial actions which can effectively
maintain water quality conditions adequate for public recreation and
enjoyment, including, but not limited to, the control or eradication of
exotic aquatic weeds pursuant to paragraphs II and III.
                                             
 II. The department is directed to prevent the introduction and
further dispersal of exotic aquatic weeds and to manage, control, or
eradicate exotic aquatic weed infestations in the surface waters of the
state. The department is authorized to:
                                             
 (a) Display and distribute promotional material and engage in
educational efforts informing boaters of the problems with exotic
aquatic weed control.
                                             
 (b) Control or eradicate infestations of exotic aquatic weeds,
according to the following criteria:
                                             
 (1) The department shall have determined that the exotic
aquatic weed can in fact be controlled or eradicated in the waterbody.
                                             
 (2) The most environmentally sound treatment technique
relative to the specific infestation will be used, which also meets the
requirements of state rules, including rules adopted under RSA 430.
Notwithstanding any law or interagency agreement to the contrary, the
department's recommendation to use herbicide applications shall be made
in consultation with the fish and game department and shall be
implemented only if the department of agriculture, markets, and food
issues the permit pursuant to RSA 430:33, with or without the
concurrence of the department of fish and game.
                                             
 (c) Develop an emergency response protocol to control or
eradicate small new infestations. The protocol may include contractual
agreements with one or more licensed pesticide applicators that would
enable the prompt treatment of exotic aquatic weeds with herbicides
consistent with the criteria provided in subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (d) Designate, in consultation with the department of fish and
game and the division of state police, department of safety, restricted
use of exotic aquatic weed control areas.
                                             
 III. After notice and opportunity for hearing and comment, the
department may make financial grants to lakefront associations, private
businesses, citizens, and local governmental agencies for the management
of exotic aquatic weeds. All applications for grants by such groups
shall be approved by the department, in consultation with the fish and
game department, and shall meet state rule requirements.

**Source.** 1990, 143:2. 1996, 228:100, 106. 1997, 185:4. 2002, 201:4.
2006, 144:1. 2007, 263:102. 2011, 224:273, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 487:18

 **487:18 Project Prioritization. –** Project approval shall be based
upon prioritization factors to be established by rules adopted under RSA
541-A. Such rules shall give first priority for expenditure of available
funds to the control or eradication of new infestations of exotic
aquatic weeds pursuant to RSA 487:17, II(b). Otherwise, preference shall
be given to lakes that have public access or that serve as a public
drinking water supply. Implementation measures shall be based upon an
assessment of potential success, technical feasibility, practicability,
and cost effectiveness. Restoration and preservation projects shall
include watershed management plans to control and reduce incoming
nutrients wherever possible through best management practices. Repeated
short-term solutions shall be discouraged where long-term solutions are
feasible and cost effective. Treatments shall be designed to minimize
any adverse effect upon fish and wildlife, their habitats, and the
environment.

**Source.** 1990, 143:2. 2002, 201:5. 2007, 263:103, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 487:19

 **487:19 Public Hearings. –** No project for the implementation of a
lakes restoration or preservation program shall be approved or initiated
until at least 2 public hearings have been held on the project. Said
hearings shall be held in one or more of the affected municipalities.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 487:20

 **487:20 Eligibility. –** To be eligible for funding under this
subdivision, a body of water shall be any freshwater lake or pond which
meets priorities established under RSA 487:18. Lakefront associations,
private businesses, citizens and local government agencies shall be
eligible to apply for funding under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 487:21

 **487:21 Cost Sharing. –**
                                             
 I. For diagnostic and feasibility studies where the federal
government has made financial assistance available in the amount of 70
percent of the cost, the department may provide an amount not exceeding
30 percent of the total eligible costs as determined by the department.
Where no federal funding is available, the department may provide an
amount not exceeding 80 percent of the total eligible costs.
                                             
 II. For implementation of restoration or preservation projects where
the federal government has made financial assistance available in the
amount of 50 percent of the costs, the department may provide an amount
not exceeding 35 percent of the total eligible costs, as determined by
the department. Where no federal funding is available, the department
may provide an amount not exceeding 80 percent of the total eligible
costs.
                                             
 III. For water quality maintenance programs, the department may
provide an amount of funding not to exceed 80 percent of the total
eligible costs, as determined by the department, except that for the
control of new infestations of exotic aquatic weeds the state may assume
100 percent of the cost.
                                             
 IV. The local cost share shall be the cost of a project remaining
after taking into account any state and federal funding.
                                             
 V. An amount up to 10 percent of the total available funding may be
expended on research that addresses the problems of lake eutrophication
and exotic aquatic weeds.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3. 1996, 228:106. 2002, 201:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 487:22

 **487:22 Municipal Agreements. –** Whenever a project requires a
commitment of cooperative action or local cost sharing involving 2 or
more municipalities, all participating municipalities shall execute an
intermunicipal agreement relative to their respective obligations. No
project which requires a local match shall be initiated with state
funding until such an agreement, if applicable, has been approved by the
legislative bodies of all the involved municipalities.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 487:23

 **487:23 Agency Cooperation. –** The department shall make a
concerted effort to integrate and coordinate the clean lakes program
with other environmental management programs involving lakes and their
watersheds, whether such programs fall within the jurisdiction of the
department of environmental services or within that of another state
department. The university system and the department shall maintain
regular communication for the purpose of sharing data bases and other
relevant information.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3. 1996, 228:101, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 487:24

 **487:24 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The criteria to be used in the prioritization of grants for
diagnostic or feasibility studies.
                                             
 II. The criteria used to determine the priority of implementation
projects and maintenance projects.
                                             
 III. Contracting procedures with local governments or private
businesses.
                                             
 IV. Application procedures to participate in the program.
                                             
 V. Criteria for the determination of project eligibility.
                                             
 VI. Criteria governing the conduct of and reporting requirements on
diagnostic and feasibility studies, implementation projects and
maintenance projects.
                                             
 VII. Designation of plants as exotic aquatic weeds as defined in RSA
487:16, II.
                                             
 VII-a. Administration and enforcement of, and exemptions to, the
exotic aquatic weed prohibition under RSA 487:16-a.
                                             
 VII-b. Criteria governing the emergency response protocol under RSA
487:17, II(c).
                                             
 VII-c. Designation of restricted use exotic aquatic weed control
areas under RSA 487:17, II(d).
                                             
 VIII. Any other matters that are necessary to implement the
provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3. 1997, 185:5. 1999, 204:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 487:25

 **487:25 Lake Restoration and Preservation Fund; Addition to Boat
Fee. –**
                                             
 I. The fee of 
                                             $9.50 collected under the provisions of RSA 270-E:5,
II(a) shall be paid to the director of the division of motor vehicles.
The director of the division of motor vehicles shall pay over said fee
to the state treasurer who shall keep the fee in a special fund to be
expended by the department of environmental services. The department
shall use 
                                             $.50 of the fee for lake restoration and preservation
measures, exclusive of exotic aquatic weed control, 
                                             $5 of the fee for
the control of exotic aquatic weeds, and 
                                             $4 of the fee for the milfoil
and other exotic aquatic plants prevention program. The department shall
deposit the 
                                             $4 into a special account within the lake restoration and
preservation fund which shall be used to administer the milfoil and
other exotic aquatic plants prevention program. The special fund shall
be nonlapsing. All funds received under this section are continually
appropriated to the department for the purposes of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The department is authorized to utilize such methods of control
and to employ such personnel, consultant services, and equipment as, in
its judgment, will control aquatic nuisances in the surface waters of
the state as defined in RSA 485-A:2.
                                             
 III. The department shall be the agency to receive and utilize
federal funds, gifts, or grants from any person or association, which
may be made available for the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 143:3. 1996, 228:102, 106. 1997, 185:6. 2002, 201:2.
2009, 144:149, eff. Aug. 28, 2009. 2014, 231:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

Milfoil and Other Exotic Aquatic Plants Prevention
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 487:26

 **487:26 Grant Program Established. –** There is hereby established
a grant program to be administered by the department of environmental
services for the allocation of money to state agencies, non-profit
organizations, and municipalities or political subdivisions of the state
which seek to administer a milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants
prevention program, and to institutions of higher learning which seek to
conduct research on milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants remediation
techniques. The grant program shall be funded by the portion of the lake
restoration and preservation fund, established in RSA 487:25, and
allocated to the milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants prevention
program. Approximately 3/4 of the moneys distributed from the fund to
the milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants prevention program shall be
allocated for the purposes of milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants
prevention and the remainder shall be allocated to milfoil and other
exotic aquatic plants remediation research, as appropriate, based on
grant requests. Of the moneys in the milfoil and other exotic aquatic
plants prevention program, the moneys allocated specifically for the
purposes of the milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants prevention shall
be distributed upon approval of the commissioner of the department of
environmental services and the commissioner of safety. Of the moneys in
the milfoil and other exotic aquatic plants prevention program, the
moneys allocated specifically for the purposes of milfoil and other
exotic aquatic plants remediation research shall be distributed upon
approval of the commissioner of the department of environmental
services.

**Source.** 2002, 201:3. 2010, 352:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 487:27

 **487:27 Management Plan. –** The commissioner of the department of
environmental services, or designee, in consultation with the
commissioner of safety, or designee, shall establish a management plan
to implement the grant program. The management plan shall include, but
not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Eligibility determination criteria and procedures.
                                             
 II. Application requirements and procedures.
                                             
 III. Project selection and prioritization requirements and
procedures.
                                             
 IV. Stewardship requirements and procedures, including annual
reporting to the department by the grantee.

**Source.** 2002, 201:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 487:28

 **487:28 Eligible Applicants; Matching Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The department of environmental services shall distribute funds
for projects to further the purposes of this program only to eligible
applicants. Eligible applicants shall include:
                                             
 (a) Publicly-supported nonprofit corporations exempt from federal
income taxation under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
                                             
 (b) Municipalities or other political subdivisions of the state.
                                             
 (c) Institutions of higher learning.
                                             
 (d) State agencies.
                                             
 II. All eligible applicants shall provide a minimum level of
matching resources equal to 50 percent of the proposed program budget.
The department may exempt institutions of higher learning from the
required match. The cost-sharing match may be met through the use of
in-kind services. Qualifying matching funds from the applicant may
include, but are not limited to, municipal appropriations, private
donations, federal funds, and the value of goods and services provided
by the applicant.

**Source.** 2002, 201:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 487:29

 **487:29 Milfoil and Other Exotic Aquatic Plants Prevention; Grant
Fund Report and Budget. –** The department of environmental services
shall submit an annual report, beginning on January 1, 2004, to the
speaker of the house, president of the senate, and the governor and
council which shall include, but not be limited to, a description of
prevention and research projects funded by the milfoil and other exotic
aquatic plants prevention program and the extent of aid to
municipalities or subdivisions of the state, non-profit corporations,
and research institutions.

**Source.** 2002, 201:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 487:30

 **487:30 Exotic Aquatic Weeds and Species Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a committee to study exotic aquatic weeds
and exotic aquatic species of wildlife in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. (a) The members of the committee shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) Five members of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (2) One member of the senate and 2 public members, appointed
by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (3) One member of the New Hampshire Lakes Association,
appointed by the chairman of the board of that association with the
concurrence of the chairperson of the committee.
                                             
 (4) One member of the New Hampshire Rivers Council, appointed
by the president of that organization.
                                             
 (5) The executive director of the fish and game department, or
designee.
                                             
 (6) One member of the Connecticut River Watershed Council,
appointed by the executive director of that organization.
                                             
 (7) One member of the New Hampshire Marine Trades Association,
appointed by the president of that organization.
                                             
 (8) The commissioner of the department of environmental
services, or designee.
                                             
 (9) The commissioner of the department of agriculture,
markets, and food, or designee.
                                             
 (10) One member of the Northeast Aquatic Plant Management
Society, appointed by the president of that organization.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the committee shall serve terms which
are coterminous to their terms on the general court and shall receive
mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the
committee.
                                             
 III. The committee shall:
                                             
 (a) Study the spread of exotic aquatic weeds and exotic aquatic
species of wildlife, as defined in RSA 487:16, I-a, in the waters of New
Hampshire including education, management, and potential means to
eliminate the spread of these weeds and wildlife.
                                             
 (b) Aid the department of environmental services in the control
and eradication of milfoil.
                                             
 (c) Study the best management practices used in other states to
prevent the introduction of, and to research, monitor, control, and
eradicate exotic aquatic weeds and wildlife.
                                             
 (d) Recommend to the department of fish and game a program for
research, monitoring, control, or eradication if an invasive exotic
aquatic species of wildlife is discovered in the state.
                                             
 III-a. The committee may solicit, hold, and expend gifts, grants,
and donations from any source to carry out the purposes of the
committee.
                                             
 IV. The members of the committee shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the committee shall be called by
the first-named house member. The first meeting of the committee shall
be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Four
members of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 V. The committee shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of representatives,
the senate president, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the governor,
and the state library on or before November 1 of each year.

**Source.** 2004, 115:1. 2005, 240:2. 2009, 167:5, 6. 2011, 90:1, 2,
eff. May 27, 2011. 2014, 133:1, eff. June 16, 2014. 2015, 164:2, 3, eff.
Aug. 25, 2015.

New Hampshire Volunteer Lake Assessment Program
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 487:31

 **487:31 Volunteer Lake Assessment Program Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department of environmental
services the New Hampshire volunteer lake assessment program to provide
water quality data to the state and federal governments to define water
quality trends; provide data for lake protection, management, and
remediation programs; provide information to classify New Hampshire
waters; and supply data for surface water quality reports.
                                             
 II. To the extent that funds are available, the department shall:
                                             
 (a) Assist volunteer organizations to monitor the water quality
of public lakes and ponds and tributaries to said lakes and ponds;
                                             
 (b) Provide technical assistance to lake associations,
municipalities, educational facilities, and the general public for the
purpose of monitoring lake water quality;
                                             
 (c) Educate citizens in the need and methods to sample lakes and
ponds and the importance of keeping the state's waters clean;
                                             
 (d) Provide the water quality data obtained by volunteers to
other state programs that administer water quality programs, the federal
government, including the Environmental Protection Agency, and
municipalities;
                                             
 (e) Provide volunteer monitoring organizations with an annual
monitoring report that includes historical data and trends and
recommendations to keep a lake or pond within the water quality
standards; and
                                             
 (f) Loan sampling equipment to volunteer monitoring organizations
as needed.

**Source.** 2005, 114:1, eff. Aug. 14, 2005.

### Section 487:32

 **487:32 Volunteer Lake Assessment Program Coordinator. –** There is
established in the department of environmental services a state
volunteer lake assessment program coordinator who shall be a classified
employee qualified by reason of education and experience and who shall
administer the New Hampshire volunteer lake assessment program.

**Source.** 2005, 114:1, eff. Aug. 14, 2005.

### Section 487:33

 **487:33 Acceptance and Expenditure of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may apply for and accept gifts, donations of
money, federal, municipal, or private grants, or other funds or
incentives from any source for the purposes of this subdivision. The
funds accepted under this paragraph shall be paid into the lake
restoration and preservation fund established under RSA 487:25. All
funds received shall be continually appropriated to the department for
the purposes of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may expend any funds received under paragraph I
for the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 2005, 114:1, eff. Aug. 14, 2005.

New Hampshire Healthy Tidal Waters and Shellfish Protection Program
-------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 487:34

 **487:34 Healthy Tidal Waters and Shellfish Protection Program
Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department of environmental
services the New Hampshire healthy tidal waters and shellfish protection
program. This program ensures that water quality in coastal waters
supports the propagation, conservation, and harvest of shellfish.
                                             
 II. To the extent that funds are available, the department shall:
                                             
 (a) Exercise and administer the classification of coastal waters
under New Hampshire shellfish sanitation control authority, pursuant to
RSA 143:21 and RSA 143:21-a, so that all waters suitable for shellfish
propagation and harvest are classified, and, to the maximum extent
possible, classified areas are approved for harvest of shellfish, in
accordance with the National Shellfish Sanitation Program.
                                             
 (b) Identify impaired water quality for shellfish harvesting and
work with cooperating agencies and the public to mitigate impairments.
                                             
 (c) Educate citizens about the need for watershed stewardship to
keep coastal waters clean for harvest of shellfish and other designated
uses that depend upon safe and clean water.
                                             
 (d) Conduct strategic planning, together with cooperating
agencies and organizations, for New Hampshire's shellfish program, to
enhance recreational shellfish harvest and establish commercial
aquaculture harvest potential.

**Source.** 2006, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 487:35

 **487:35 Finding of Public Purpose. –** The general court finds that
it is for the public good and welfare of this state to protect and
preserve its tidal waters for propagation and harvest of shellfish and
for other beneficial uses. Shellfish propagation and harvest is a
primary indicator of the overall ecological and water quality health of
coastal waters. As such, the general court further recognizes the need
to restore, preserve, and maintain the state's tidal waters in order
that these significant environmental, aesthetic, and recreational assets
will continue to benefit the social and economic well-being of the
state's citizens.

**Source.** 2006, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 487:36

 **487:36 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Coastal waters'' means surface waters of the state, as defined
in RSA 485-A:2, XIV, that are subject to the influence of the tides.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.

**Source.** 2006, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 487:37

 **487:37 Healthy Tidal Waters and Shellfish Protection Fund
Established. –**
                                             
 I. A special healthy tidal waters and shellfish protection fund is
established for exclusive use by the department to accomplish the
purposes of this subdivision. This fund shall be nonlapsing and
continually appropriated to the department for the purposes of this
subdivision.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may apply for and accept, from any source,
gifts; donations of money; federal, municipal, or private grants;
legislative appropriations; and other funds and incentives for the
purposes of this subdivision. The funds accepted under this paragraph
shall be paid into the healthy tidal waters and shellfish protection
fund established under paragraph I.

**Source.** 2006, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 487:37-a

 **487:37-a Lease of State-Owned Land for Shellfish Restoration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner, jointly with the executive director of the fish
and game department, shall make recommendations pursuant to RSA 4:40
concerning the leasing of state-owned submerged lands in the Great Bay
estuary for the purpose of shellfish restoration.
                                             
 II. Leases granted under this section shall be for noncommercial
shellfish restoration purposes only, in areas where restoration will not
unduly interfere with existing or anticipated commercial or recreational
activities.
                                             
 III. The executive director of the fish and game department, jointly
with the commissioner, shall determine the terms of any such lease,
including the amount of acreage and duration.
                                             
 IV. No fee shall be charged for any lease granted under this
section.
                                             
 V. Any person seeking a lease under this section shall obtain a
permit under RSA 482-A:3.

**Source.** 2015, 32:1, eff. July 6, 2015.

New Hampshire Volunteer River Assessment Program
------------------------------------------------

### Section 487:38

 **487:38 Volunteer River Assessment Program Established. –** There
is established within the department of environmental services the New
Hampshire volunteer river assessment program to provide:
                                             
 I. Water quality and related environmental data to the state and
federal governments to define water quality trends;
                                             
 II. Data for river protection, management, and restoration
programs;
                                             
 III. Information to classify New Hampshire waters; and
                                             
 IV. Data for surface water assessment reports.

**Source.** 2009, 201:18, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 487:39

 **487:39 Purpose. –** The general court finds that landscape changes
and recreational and other uses of rivers and their watersheds have
placed increasing stress upon the state's rivers, posing a threat to
water quality and the continued support of designated uses. The general
court recognizes the need for adequate data to identify the status of
and trends in water quality as a basis for action, to restore, preserve,
and maintain the state's rivers so that these significant environmental,
recreational, and economic assets will continue to benefit the social
and economic well-being of the state's citizens and support healthy
ecosystems.

**Source.** 2009, 201:18, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 487:40

 **487:40 Duties of the Department. –** To the extent that funds are
available, the department shall:
                                             
 I. Assist volunteer organizations in monitoring the water quality of
rivers and streams;
                                             
 II. Provide technical assistance to local river management advisory
committees, watershed organizations, municipalities, educational
facilities, and the general public for the purpose of monitoring river
water quality;
                                             
 III. Educate citizens about the need for and the methods of sampling
river and stream waters and the importance of keeping the state's waters
clean;
                                             
 IV. Provide the water quality data obtained by volunteers to other
state programs that administer water quality programs; the federal
government, including the Environmental Protection Agency; and
municipalities;
                                             
 V. Provide volunteer monitoring organizations with an annual
monitoring report that includes historical data, trends, and
recommendations to keep a river or stream within the water quality
standards; and
                                             
 VI. Lend sampling equipment to volunteer monitoring organizations as
needed.

**Source.** 2009, 201:18, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 487:41

 **487:41 Volunteer River Assessment Program Coordinator. –** There
is established in the department of environmental services a state
volunteer river assessment program coordinator who shall be a classified
employee qualified by reason of education and experience and who shall
administer the New Hampshire volunteer river assessment program.

**Source.** 2009, 201:18, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 487:42

 **487:42 Acceptance and Expenditure of Funds. –** The commissioner
may apply for and accept gifts, donations of money, federal, municipal,
or private grants, or other funds or incentives from any source. The
funds accepted under this section shall be paid into the rivers
management and protection fund established under RSA 483:13. The
commissioner may expend such funds for the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 2009, 201:18, eff. July 15, 2009.
