---
title: CHAPTER 488 WATER MANAGEMENT
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 488
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT
----------------

### Section 488:1

 **488:1 Statement of Purpose. –** This chapter provides for uniform
statewide collection of water use data to understand how water resources
are utilized in the state by establishing procedures and standards for
the registration, measurement, and reporting of water use. The
legislature recognizes the fundamental importance of water resources and
intends to provide a framework to obtain and maintain basic water use
data for the state. The legislature recognizes that information
describing the major water uses of the state along with assessing the
amount of water in a given watershed or aquifer are integral to all
water resource quantity assessments and management decisions. Water use
data is necessary to understand the effects of cumulative uses,
transfers, discharges, and consumptive water losses in aquifers and
watersheds in the state. Water use data also identifies the quantity and
timing of existing water uses, and this information can be used to
estimate future water needs of the state. Water use data is also
necessary for verifying compliance with and equitable enforcement of
state laws pertaining to groundwater and surface water.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:2

 **488:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 III. "Discharge'' means the return of water to the environment.
                                             
 IV. "Groundwater'' means subsurface water that occurs beneath the
water table in soils and geologic formations.
                                             
 V. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, company, public or
private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the state,
department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, or any other
legal entity.
                                             
 VI. "Surface waters'' means any lake, pond, river, stream, wetland,
or tidal waters.
                                             
 VII. "Transfer'' means any conveyance of water from one real
property or place of business to another or incorporation into a product
for subsequent distribution.
                                             
 VIII. "Withdrawal'' means the removal or collection of water by
pumping or gravity from surface water or groundwater.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:3

 **488:3 Registration Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall withdraw or discharge a cumulative amount of more
than 20,000 gallons of water per day, averaged over any 7-day period, or
more than 600,000 gallons of water over any 30-day period, at a single
real property or place of business without registering the withdrawal or
discharge with the department. Transfers of such volume of water shall
also be registered. Registration shall be in addition to any required
permits.
                                             
 II. No registration shall be transferred to another person without
written notification to the commissioner.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:4

 **488:4 Measurement Required. –** Each withdrawal, discharge, or
transfer required to be registered under this chapter shall be metered
or measured by a technically appropriate and verifiable method approved
by the commissioner. Withdrawals and discharges shall be measured at the
point of withdrawal or discharge, respectively. Transfers shall be
measured at a technically appropriate point approved by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:4-a

 **488:4-a Measurement of Withdrawals for Snowmaking. –**
Notwithstanding RSA 488:4, water use associated with snowmaking shall be
measured at the point water is withdrawn from any natural source of
water for use by a snowmaking system and at the point that water is
entering into the snowmaking system, and such water withdrawal and use
shall be measured by an appropriate and calculable method such as a
weir, stream gauge, meter, or a technically appropriate and calculable
method utilizing the manufacturer's plated specifications as they relate
to gallons of water pumped per minute. Diversions from natural sources
into storage reservoirs may be measured by using the measurement of the
amount of water entering a snowmaking system and by calculating the
change in the amount of water stored in the storage reservoir, provided
separate records of the water withdrawn from each natural source are
maintained.

**Source.** 2011, 142:1, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 488:5

 **488:5 Application for Registration. –** Registration shall be in a
form prescribed by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:6

 **488:6 Recordkeeping. –** The registrant shall keep records that
include the amount of water being withdrawn, discharged, or transferred,
the location, the frequency, date, time, and the rate of withdrawal,
discharge, or transfer and other information the commissioner may
require to fulfill the purpose of this chapter. The registrant shall
submit records to the department in a form and at a frequency prescribed
by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:6-a

 **488:6-a Record Keeping for Snowmaking Withdrawals. –**
Notwithstanding RSA 488:6, water use records associated with snowmaking
shall be maintained and documented monthly, and 24-hour maximum volumes
of water withdrawn from each natural water source and the water entering
the snowmaking system shall be maintained and documented monthly.

**Source.** 2011, 142:2, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 488:7

 **488:7 Compliance. –**
                                             
 I. Registration and withdrawal of water under RSA 488:3 shall be
deemed to grant permission to the department to enter onto the
registered property to review compliance with the provisions of the
registration.
                                             
 II. Upon obtaining credible information that any person is not
registered in accordance with RSA 488:3, I and is withdrawing,
discharging, or transferring a cumulative amount of more than 20,000
gallons of water per day, averaged over any 7-day period, or more than
600,000 gallons of water over any 30-day period, at a single real
property or place of business, the department may obtain an
administrative inspection warrant in accordance with RSA 595-B to
determine compliance with the registration requirements.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:8

 **488:8 Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner, after notice and hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A,
may impose an administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense
upon any person who knowingly:
                                             
 (a) Violates any provision of this chapter or any rule or order
adopted or issued under it.
                                             
 (b) Makes any material false statement in any document required
to be filed or maintained.
                                             
 (c) Renders inaccurate, falsifies, or tampers with any monitoring
device or method.
                                             
 II. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the commissioner under
this section shall be in accordance with RSA 541.
                                             
 III. Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not
preclude the imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The
commissioner may assess additional fines upon any person who has
received written notification from the department regarding violations
of the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted pursuant to this
chapter, if the violations have not been mitigated within 30 days of
receipt of notification.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 488:9

 **488:9 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The content and structure of all forms pertaining to
registrations to be received or issued by the department, including
information and other materials to be submitted with the registration.
                                             
 II. The form, content, structure, and frequency of filing of the
records required under this chapter. The commissioner shall balance
resource management objectives with the economic impact of filings when
determining the substance of this rule and shall also give consideration
to proprietary and confidentiality concerns.
                                             
 III. Criteria and methodology for water withdrawal, transfer, and
discharge measurement.
                                             
 IV. Criteria to identify actions that constitute withdrawals,
transfers, or discharges required to be registered pursuant to this
chapter.
                                             
 V. A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this chapter for violation of this chapter or rules adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
                                             
 VI. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of an
administrative fine.
                                             
 VII. Forms and frequency for reporting to the department the records
required under RSA 488:6-a regarding snowmaking and water withdrawals
for snowmaking.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1. 2011, 142:3, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 488:10

 **488:10 Appeals. –** Unless otherwise specified, actions of the
department may be appealed in accordance with RSA 21-O:14.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 488:11

 **488:11 Exemption. –** This chapter shall not apply to a discrete
withdrawal arising from an emergency event.

**Source.** 2005, 240:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.
