---
title: 'CHAPTER 489-C SALT APPLICATOR CERTIFICATION OPTION'
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 489-C
                                             
SALT APPLICATOR CERTIFICATION OPTION
------------------------------------

### Section 489-C:1

 **489-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Apply salt'' means to apply salt or a salt alternative to
roadways, parking lots, or sidewalks for the purpose of winter
maintenance.
                                             
 II. "Commercial applicator'' means any individual who applies or
supervises others who apply salt, but shall not include municipal or
state employees.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 V. "Salt'' means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, magnesium
chloride, or any other substance containing chloride.
                                             
 VI. "Salt alternative'' means any substance not containing chloride
used for the purpose of de-icing or anti-icing.

**Source.** 2013, 144:122, eff. Sept. 26, 2013.

### Section 489-C:2

 **489-C:2 Certification Option. –** Commercial applicators may elect
to be annually certified by the department. Applicator certificates
shall be issued by the department. Any business that employs multiple
commercial applicators may obtain a master certificate for the owner or
chief supervisor, and commercial applicators employed by the business
may obtain certificates to qualify under the master certificate. Any
business holding a master certificate shall ensure that all commercial
applicators operating under its master certificate receive the required
training and shall provide the required recordkeeping on behalf of all
commercial applicators. Annual fees for certificates obtained under a
master certificate shall be significantly less than the fees for a
master certificate.

**Source.** 2013, 144:122, eff. Sept. 26, 2013.

### Section 489-C:3

 **489-C:3 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner shall adopt
rules pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Policies and goals for applying salt.
                                             
 II. Receiving and allocating federal grants and other funds or gifts
for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 III. The types and frequency of training programs required for
certification.
                                             
 IV. Procedures for commercial applicators to obtain certification.
                                             
 V. Recordkeeping required for commercial applicators to maintain
certification.
                                             
 VI. Establishing and collecting fees to cover the cost of program
implementation.

**Source.** 2013, 144:122, eff. Sept. 26, 2013. 2015, 229:19, eff. July
1, 2015.

### Section 489-C:4

 **489-C:4 Application for Certification. –** Applications for
certification shall be on a form prescribed by the department and shall
include the following:
                                             
 I. The full name and address of the person applying for the
certification.
                                             
 II. The name and address of a person whose domicile is in the state,
and who is authorized to receive and accept service of summons and legal
notices of all kinds for the applicant.
                                             
 III. The type of apparatus used to apply salt or salt alternative
whether liquid or dry.
                                             
 IV. Any other information deemed necessary by the department.

**Source.** 2013, 144:122, eff. Sept. 26, 2013.

### Section 489-C:5

 **489-C:5 Administration and Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
                                             
 II. The department may issue an order to any person who is in
violation of any provision of this chapter, an applicator certificate
issued under this chapter, or a rule adopted under this chapter, to
cease and desist from any act in violation of such provision,
certification, or rule. Orders of the department under this section
shall be effective immediately.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, after notice and hearing pursuant to RSA
541-A, may revoke the certification of any person who violates this
chapter. Rehearings and appeals relating to revocation shall be governed
by RSA 541.
                                             
 IV. There is hereby established a salt application fund. This
nonlapsing fund shall be continually appropriated to the department and
used to administer the salt applicator certification program under this
chapter. Certification fees collected by the department shall be
deposited with the state treasurer to the credit of such fund and may be
invested as provided by law. Interest received on such investment shall
also be credited to the fund. No funds from the general fund shall be
used to cover the cost of the salt applicator certification program.

**Source.** 2013, 144:122, eff. Sept. 26, 2013. 2015, 229:20, eff. July
1, 2015.
