---
title: CHAPTER 26 CONDEMNATION OF LAND FOR COUNTY USES
---

TITLE II
                                             
COUNTIES
=========

CHAPTER 26
                                             
CONDEMNATION OF LAND FOR COUNTY USES
------------------------------------

### Section 26:1

 **26:1 Procedure. –** Whenever any county cannot obtain by contract,
for a reasonable price, any land required for public use, its
commissioners, agents or committee, authorized by the county convention
to procure such land, may prepare a written location, containing an
accurate description of such land, and give notice of a hearing thereon
before the commissioners, which notice shall be served as required by
law for notices of hearings before selectmen on petitions for highways;
and all provisions for the hearing of highway petitions before selectmen
shall apply to such hearings so far as the same are applicable, but the
return of the location and of the assessment of damages shall be filed
with the clerk of court for the county.

**Source.** 1907, 42:1. PL 35:26. RL 44:29.

### Section 26:2

 **26:2 Appeals. –** Any person aggrieved by such location or
assessment of damages may appeal to the superior court by petition
within 60 days after the return is filed. The court, on application of
any interested party, may designate in what county the petition relating
to such location shall be tried, and the clerk shall transmit the
petition to the clerk of court for the county so designated. Any
petition made after such designation may be originally filed in the
county designated.

**Source.** 1907, 42:2. PL 35:27. RL 44:30. RSA 26:2. 1967, 132:1, eff.
July 18, 1967.

### Section 26:3

 **26:3 Procedure on Appeals. –** All provisions for highway appeals
shall apply to the appeals herein provided for, so far as the same are
applicable; but service of the summons shall be made upon the county
interested in the manner provided by law for service of writs upon a
county.

**Source.** 1907, 42:3. PL 35:28. RL 44:31. 2014, 204:2, eff. July 11,
2014.
