---
title: 'CHAPTER 28-A COUNTY CHARTERS'
---

TITLE II
                                             
COUNTIES
=========

CHAPTER 28-A
                                             
COUNTY CHARTERS
---------------

### Section 28-A:1

 **28-A:1 Charter Commission; Petition; Establishment. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A person registered to vote within the county may file a
declaration of intent to petition the establishment of a county charter
commission with the board of commissioners.
                                             
 (b) Petitions shall be on paper of uniform size and may consist
of as many individual pages as are necessary provided that a separate
petition shall be utilized for each municipality in which signatures are
solicited. The petition circulated in each municipality and ward, where
wards exist, shall bear the heading "PETITION FOR COUNTY CHARTER
COMMISSION'', underneath which shall be printed "Municipality of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _; Ward 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,'' followed by the
paragraph:
                                             
 "Each of the undersigned voters respectfully requests the county
convention to establish a charter commission for the purpose of studying
the need for and/or preparing a county charter to be submitted to the
voters of the County of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ .''
                                             
 (c) Each signature shall be in ink or other indelible instrument
and shall be followed by the place of residence with street and number,
if any. No petition shall contain any party or political designation.
                                             
 (d) Before submission to the board of commissioners, each
petition shall be certified by the clerk of the municipality in which it
was circulated as to the voting registration of the signatories. The
clerk shall strike those names who are found not to be registered
voters; however, this shall not in any way invalidate the remaining
names.
                                             
 II. (a) Upon submission of petitions totalling at least 10 percent
of the registered voters within the county, the board of commissioners
shall convene the county convention within 60 days to vote upon the
following question:
                                             
 "Shall a county charter commission be established for the purpose of
studying the need for a written county charter establishing the
structure of county government and, if the commission deems necessary,
for the purpose of drafting a county charter for submission to the
voters?''
                                             
 (b) If 2/3 of the county convention members present and voting
vote to establish a charter commission, a nominating committee shall be
established consisting of the 3 county commissioners and 4 members of
the executive committee of the county convention selected by the
chairman of the county convention. The nominating committee shall
present a list of charter commissioners to the full convention. The
county convention shall accept or reject the list without amendments by
a simple majority vote. In the event of rejection, the nominating
committee shall prepare a new slate of nominees, including any it may
desire to renominate, for submission to the convention within 30 days.
If the second slate of nominees is rejected, the nominating committee
shall prepare a third and final list, which shall constitute the charter
commission without further action by the convention.
                                             
 (c) If the county convention votes against the establishment of a
charter commission, the board of commissioners shall not submit the
above question to the county convention for at least 2 calendar years
following the negative vote.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.

### Section 28-A:2

 **28-A:2 Membership; Appointments. –** The nominating committee
shall observe the following rules in nominating the 15 member charter
commission:
                                             
 I. No more than 5 members shall be appointed from each commissioner
voting district.
                                             
 II. The members shall be appointed as equally as possible from each
of the commissioner voting districts. For counties without districts,
the appointees shall represent varied geographical areas of the county.
                                             
 III. No more than 60 percent of the members shall be members of the
same political party.
                                             
 IV. At least one member shall be the chairman of the board of
commissioners or his designee from the county.
                                             
 V. At least 3 members shall be currently elected state
representatives from the county.
                                             
 VI. At least 5 members shall not currently hold an elective office
in any level of government.
                                             
 VII. All members shall be persons with expertise in government
structure, the law, or other skills useful to the commission.
                                             
 VIII. Up to 2 members may be nonresidents who have special knowledge
or expertise in government organization, law, or other skills useful to
the commission.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.

### Section 28-A:3

 **28-A:3 Scope of Authorization; Procedure; Meetings; Budget. –**
                                             
 I. A charter commission established under this chapter may recommend
a charter which meets the needs of the county in terms of structure and
operation to include, but not be limited to, such matters as: numbers
and duties of elected officials, except elected officials specified by
the Constitution of the state of New Hampshire; method of electing
officials; manner of filling vacancies; powers of nomination,
appointment and confirmation; terms of office; establishment and
operations of nonconstitutional offices, agencies and departments; and
adoption of the county budget.
                                             
 II. The charter commission shall meet within 30 days of its
appointment at a meeting called by the chairman of the board of
commissioners. At this meeting, the charter commission shall organize by
electing from its members a chairman, a vice chairman, and
clerk-secretary. The commission shall also prepare a schedule for future
meetings. All meetings, hearings and deliberations of the charter
commission shall be subject to RSA 91-A.
                                             
 III. Vacancies occurring on the commission shall be filled promptly
by the nominating committee using the same rules for selection as in RSA
28-A:2. Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for expenses lawfully incurred by them in the performance of
their duties.
                                             
 IV. The charter commission shall adopt rules governing the conduct
of its meetings and proceedings in accordance with an accepted
parliamentary procedure, shall keep appropriate records, and may employ
such legal, research, clerical, or other employees and consultants as
are deemed necessary within the limits of its budget.
                                             
 V. The county commissioners shall provide the charter commission
with suitable space and with reasonable access to county facilities for
holding public hearings, may contribute clerical and other assistance to
such commission, and shall permit reasonable access to consult with and
obtain advice and information from county officers, officials, and
employees during ordinary working hours.
                                             
 VI. Within 60 days after its organizational meeting, the charter
commission shall hold 3 public hearings in 3 separate locations within
the county for the purpose of receiving information, views, comments,
and other pertinent material relative to its functions. All public
hearings before a charter commission shall be held within the county at
such times and places as may be specified in a notice published at least
10 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation
in the county, but public hearings may be adjourned and reconvened from
time to time without further published notice.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.

### Section 28-A:4

 **28-A:4 Charter Commission Report; Referendum. –**
                                             
 I. Within 9 months after its election, the charter commission, if it
determines a charter shall be proposed, shall prepare a preliminary
report including the text of the charter which the commission intends
shall be submitted to the voters and any explanatory information the
commission deems desirable, and shall cause such report to be printed
and circulated to the board of commissioners, the county convention, the
secretary of state, all clerks of municipalities and each public library
within the county. Within 12 months after its election, the charter
commission shall submit to the board of commissioners and the county
convention its final report, which shall include the full text and
explanation of the proposed new charter or charter revision, such
comments as the commission deems desirable, an indication of the major
differences between any current and proposed charters, and a written
opinion by an attorney admitted to the bar of this state that the
proposed charter or charter revision is not in conflict with the
Constitution or the general laws. Minority reports, if filed, shall not
exceed 1,000 words.
                                             
 II. (a) Upon the filing of the final report, the board of
commissioners shall forward the proposed new charter to the secretary of
state, who shall submit the question of adoption of the charter to the
voters on the official ballot used within the county at the next state
general election after the filing of the final report. The charter
commission shall draft the question and it may expand or elaborate on
the question; however, the substance of the question shall be as
follows:
                                             
 "Shall the proposed charter for the county (name of county) be
adopted as recommended by the charter commission?''
                                             
 (b) The charter commission shall continue in existence for 30
days after submission of the question to the voters.
                                             
 (c) In order for the charter to be adopted, at least 2/3 of the
voters voting on the question must vote "yes'' on the charter question.
The results of the vote on this question shall be forwarded by the
municipal clerks to the secretary of state in the same manner as the
results of other balloting are reported.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.

### Section 28-A:5

 **28-A:5 Transition Period and Amendments. –** Any charter proposed
by the charter commission shall include transition provisions under
which the governmental structure set out in the charter shall take
effect. Any proposed charter shall also contain provisions for amendment
of the charter, which amendment process shall require approval by 2/3 of
the voters of the county voting on the question.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.

### Section 28-A:6

 **28-A:6 Recording. –** Within 10 days after the results of the
election have been declared, the secretary of state shall prepare and
sign duplicate certificates attesting to the adoption or rejection of
the charter. One certificate shall be recorded in the office of the
secretary of state and one certificate shall be deposited in the office
of the county commissioners.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.

### Section 28-A:7

 **28-A:7 Conflict of Laws. –** Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, county charters adopted pursuant to this chapter shall take
precedence over any other general or special laws relating to county
government structure and procedures.

**Source.** 1986, 112:1, eff. July 19, 1986.
