---
title: 'CHAPTER 28-B COUNTY-STATE FINANCE COMMISSION'
---

TITLE II
                                             
COUNTIES
=========

CHAPTER 28-B
                                             
COUNTY-STATE FINANCE COMMISSION
-------------------------------

### Section 28-B:1

 **28-B:1 Commission Established. –** There is hereby established the
county-state finance commission which shall consist of the following
members:
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. The director of the division of elderly and adult services in
the department of health and human services.
                                             
 III. Three members appointed by the commissioner of the department
of health and human services, and one member appointed by the governor
and council, who shall serve 2-year terms, provided that the initial
terms of 2 such members shall be for one year.
                                             
 IV. Six members representing county government, all appointed by the
New Hampshire Association of Counties, who shall serve 2-year terms,
provided that the initial terms of 3 such members shall be for one
year.
                                             
 V. Three members of the legislature, 2 of whom shall be members of
the house, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives, and
one of whom shall be a member of the senate, appointed by the president
of the senate, whose terms shall be coterminous with their terms in
office.

**Source.** 2003, 223:2, eff. July 1, 2003. 2009, 188:1, eff. Sept. 11,
2009.

### Section 28-B:2

 **28-B:2 Chairperson; Meetings. –** The commission shall elect a
chairperson from among its members, provided that the chair shall
alternate between a state and a county representative in a manner
determined by the commission. The commission shall meet at least
quarterly and shall adopt rules for its procedures.

**Source.** 2003, 223:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 28-B:3

 **28-B:3 Duties of the Commission. –** The county-state finance
commission shall oversee the financial relationship and the development
of policy associated with programs for which the county and state
governments share funding obligations. The commission shall have the
following responsibilities:
                                             
 I. Review and provide recommendations about the state's long-term
care medicaid plan under RSA 151-E and related provisions which address
programs for which counties have financial obligation prior to
submission of such plans to the federal medicaid agency.
                                             
 II. Review and provide recommendations regarding department of
health and human services rate setting and adjustments including, but
not limited to, those for long-term care services for elderly and adult
clients by the division of elderly and adult services, court-ordered and
volunteer services by the division for children, youth, and families,
and the division of juvenile justice services, prior to any rate setting
or adjustments.
                                             
 III. Review and provide recommendations for refinement of county
billing systems for all payments from the counties to the state.
                                             
 IV. Pursue and evaluate funding options.
                                             
 V. Develop a process for managing individual county payment limits
under RSA 167:18-a. In no event shall the individual county payment
limit reduce or alter the total county obligation under RSA 167:18-a.
                                             
 VI. Oversee:
                                             
 (a) Funds expended by the state for long-term care, including
county reimbursement of said funds under RSA 167:18-a.
                                             
 (b) State responsibility for court-ordered expenses for services
or treatment provided to minors under RSA 169-B:40, RSA 169-C:27, and
RSA 169-D:29.

**Source.** 2003, 223:2, eff. July 1, 2003. 2007, 263:14, eff. July 1,
2008. 2009, 188:2, eff. Sept. 11, 2009.
