---
title: CHAPTER 28 COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
---

TITLE II
                                             
COUNTIES
=========

CHAPTER 28
                                             
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
--------------------

### Section 28:1

 **28:1 Organization. –** The county commissioners of each county
shall choose from their number a chairman and a clerk.

**Source.** 1855, 1659:37. GS 24:1. GL 25:1. PS 27:1. PL 38:1. RL 47:1.

### Section 28:1-a

 **28:1-a Simultaneous Office. –** A county commissioner shall hold
no other county office, including that of deputy sheriff, during his
term as a county commissioner.

**Source.** 1973, 9:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1975.

### Section 28:1-b

 **28:1-b Majority Vote Required. –** All rights, authority and
powers of the county commissioners shall be exercised only by vote of a
majority of the county commissioners.

**Source.** 1973, 488:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 28:2

 **28:2 Clerk. –** The clerk shall compose, or be responsible for the
composition of, and keep a record of, the proceedings of the
commissioners, the claims allowed by them, the annual report of the
county treasurer and the proceedings of the county convention, and shall
keep on file, in a secure location, all original papers, claims and
accounts acted upon by the board.

**Source.** 1855, 1659:37. GS 24:1. GL 25:1. PS 27:1. PL 38:2. RL 47:2.
2014, 25:1, eff. July 22, 2014.

### Section 28:3

 **28:3 Financial Report. –** The clerk of each board of county
commissioners shall forward to the commissioner of revenue
administration a report giving the information concerning the financial
condition of the county required by RSA 71:25. Any clerk who fails to do
so shall be guilty of a violation, and any fine shall be recovered for
the use of the county.

**Source.** 1887, 58:2. PS 27:2. 1917, 57:1. 1921, 60:1. PL 38:3. RL
47:3. RSA 28:3. 1973, 531:2, eff. at 11:59 P.M., Oct. 31, 1973; 544:8,
eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 28:3-a

 **28:3-a County Audits. –** In the event that an audit is required,
the commissioners, with the approval of the executive committee of the
county convention, shall engage the services of a certified public
accountant qualified in municipal and county finances for the purpose of
conducting an audit of the county books of account. The performance and
scope of the audit shall be in accordance with generally-accepted
auditing practice. The audit shall include an examination for
conformance with state and federal laws and regulations relating to
county finances, including rules adopted by the commissioner of revenue
administration pursuant to RSA 541-A, and shall also include an
examination of any subject of county finances that may be requested
either by the commissioners, by the county convention, or by the
treasurer. The audit shall be completed within 90 days following the
close of the county fiscal year. The commissioners shall cause the
report of the auditor, together with the customary management letter and
auditee responses, to be published with or supplementary to the annual
reports of the county officers.

**Source.** 1991, 194:3, eff. July 27, 1991.

### Section 28:4

 **28:4 Custody of Property. –** The county commissioners shall have
the custody and care of all property belonging to the county.

**Source.** RS 19:2. CS 20:2. 1855, 1659:37. GS 24:2. GL 25:2. PS 27:3.
PL 38:4. RL 47:4.

### Section 28:5

 **28:5 County Buildings. –** The county commissioners may repair,
enlarge, or erect county buildings at an expense not exceeding 
                                             $5,000.

**Source.** RS 19:2. CS 20:2. 1855, 1659:37. GS 24:2. GL 25:2. PS 27:3.
PL 38:5. RL 47:5. RSA 28:5. 1986, 8:1, eff. May 26, 1986.

### Section 28:6

 **28:6 Personal Property. –** They may purchase personal property
for the use of the county and its officers; and may sell any of the
county personal property that is not needed for its uses.

**Source.** RS 19:2. CS 20:2. 1855, 1659:37. GS 24:2. GL 25:2. PS 27:3.
PL 38:6. RL 47:6. RSA 28:6. 1983, 383:9, eff. July 1, 1984.

### Section 28:6-a

 **28:6-a Authority to Contract for Professional Real Estate
Services. –**
                                             
 I. The county commissioners shall be authorized to contract for
professional real estate services for the sale or lease of county
property as follows:
                                             
 (a) The commissioners shall publish a request for qualifications
for professional real estate services to be procured. The commissioners
shall select licensed real estate professionals who have demonstrated
competence and qualifications to market the sale or lease of real
property.
                                             
 (b) The commissioners shall prepare a description of its
procedures for procurement of professional real estate services. These
descriptions shall be distributed to interested professionals subject to
the provisions of this section.
                                             
 (c) The commissioners shall negotiate a contract with the highest
qualified firm for professional real estate services at compensation
which the commissioners determine is fair and reasonable to the county.
In making such determination, the commissioners shall take into account
the estimated value, scope, complexity, and professional nature of the
services to be rendered.
                                             
 (d) If the commissioners are unable to negotiate a satisfactory
contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified, at a price
determined to be fair and reasonable to the county, the commissioners
shall then undertake negotiations with the next most qualified firm in
order of competence and qualifications and continue negotiations until
an agreement is reached.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Professional real estate services'' means those professional
services of licensed real estate professionals, as well as incidental
services that members of the profession and those in their employ may
logically and justifiably perform. These services shall include at a
minimum a market analysis based on the highest and best use of all
county property being sold or leased.
                                             
 (b) "Licensed real estate professional'' means any individual,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity
permitted by law to practice the real estate profession in this state
under RSA 331-A.

**Source.** 2013, 119:1, eff. Aug. 24, 2013.

### Section 28:7

 **28:7 Real Estate. –** When so authorized by the county convention
they may purchase such real estate as may be required for county
correctional facilities, including county farms, or other county uses,
and may repair, enlarge or erect county buildings at a cost exceeding

                                             $5,000; and, with like authority, they may sell any of the county's
real estate.

**Source.** 1863, 2735:1. GS 24:3. GL 25:3, 4. PS 27:5. PL 38:7. RL
47:7. RSA 28:7. 1985, 60:1, 404:3. 1988, 89:3, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 28:7-a

 **28:7-a Services to Unincorporated Towns and Unorganized Places.
–** For each unincorporated town or unorganized place, the county in
which it is located and its commissioners shall have the same
responsibilities for providing services as a town and its governing
body. County conventions may at any legal meeting grant and vote such
sums of money as they judge necessary for any purpose for which the
county may act, if such appropriation is not prohibited by the laws or
by the constitution of this state. The cost of providing services for a
county's unincorporated towns and unorganized places shall be assessed
on the property taxpayers of the unincorporated towns or unorganized
places under RSA 81.

**Source.** 1969, 127:1. 1989, 266:2, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 28:7-b

 **28:7-b Planning and Zoning in Unincorporated Towns and Unorganized
Places. –** For each unincorporated town or unorganized place, the
county in which it is located and its commissioners shall have the same
responsibilities and powers to exercise planning, zoning, subdivision
and related regulations as city and local land use boards. Regulations
shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of RSA 672-677 to
the extent practical, in order to ensure reasonable development and
planning in the unincorporated town or unorganized place.

**Source.** 1983, 161:1. 1986, 31:1. 1989, 266:2, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 28:7-c

 **28:7-c Planning and Zoning in Unincorporated Places. –**

                                             [Repealed 1989, 266:36, I, eff. July 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 28:7-d

 **28:7-d Education Money; Unincorporated Towns and Unorganized
Places. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the county commissioners of the counties
in which there are located unincorporated towns or unorganized places to
provide for the education of all the children residing in those
unincorporated towns or unorganized places by establishing standard
elementary schools in such towns or places or by furnishing tuition and
board or tuition and transportation at some approved public elementary
or high school in another district. For the purposes of this section,
counties with unincorporated towns or unorganized places shall for those
towns and places have the powers granted under RSA 194.
                                             
 II. The county commissioners shall annually on or before August 1
certify the amount of money deemed necessary to be raised by taxation
for the education of all the children residing in the unincorporated
towns or unorganized places.
                                             
 III. The certified amount shall be assessed on the taxpayers of each
unincorporated town or unorganized place under RSA 81 on a pro rata
basis based upon the actual number of school children who reside in each
town or place.

**Source.** 1989, 266:3, eff. July 1, 1990.

### Section 28:8

 **28:8 Competitive Bidding on Purchases. –** Any purchase of
equipment or materials made by a county in an amount exceeding 
                                             $5,000
shall be by competitive bidding, provided that the county commissioners
by unanimous vote may waive the provisions for such bidding. In case the
commissioners so vote a copy of such action shall be recorded in their
offices with a statement of the reason therefor and such record shall be
open to public inspection. Orders for equipment or material to be
delivered at different times where the single delivery may be less than

                                             $5,000 but the total order exceeds that amount shall be construed as
coming within the provisions hereof requiring competitive bidding.

**Source.** 1941, 108:1. RL 47:8. 1949, 165:1. RSA 28:8. 1979, 200:3,
eff. July 1, 1979. 1998, 50:1, eff. July 4, 1998.

### Section 28:8-a

 **28:8-a Competitive Bidding on Sales of Personal Property. –** Any
sale of personal property made by a county where the estimated value
thereof is in excess of 
                                             $300 shall be by competitive bidding, provided
that the county commissioners by unanimous vote may waive the provisions
for such bidding. In case the commissioners so vote a copy of such
action shall be recorded in their offices with a statement of the
reasons therefor and such record shall be open to public inspection.

**Source.** 1959, 3:1, eff. April 12, 1959.

### Section 28:8-b

 **28:8-b Open Bidding. –** Competitive bidding required by a county
in accordance with the provisions of RSA 28:8, 8-a and 8-c shall be open
to any person or legal entity wishing to submit a bid to the county.

**Source.** 1973, 408:1. 1975, 376:1, eff. Aug. 6, 1975.

### Section 28:8-c

 **28:8-c Competitive Bidding on Sales and Leases of Real Property.
–** To transfer a valid interest, a sale or lease of real property owned
by a county shall be made by the county commissioners by competitive
bidding or in accordance with RSA 28:6-a and shall be ratified by a
majority vote of the county convention and the executive committee of
the county convention.

**Source.** 1975, 376:2, eff. Aug. 6, 1975. 2013, 119:2, eff. Aug. 24,
2013.

### Section 28:8-d

 **28:8-d Use of Real Property. –**
                                             
 I. No officer or employee of a county may enter into an agreement
with any other person for the use of real property owned by the county
unless such agreement has been approved by the county commissioners and
is ratified by a majority vote of the county convention and the
executive committee of the county convention.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, the county
convention may authorize the executive committee and the county
commissioners to enter into an agreement with any other person for the
use of county-owned real property, subject to restrictions which the
county convention may impose.

**Source.** 1975, 376:2. 1995, 163:1, eff. July 31, 1995.

### Section 28:8-e

 **28:8-e Competitive Bidding; Hillsborough County. –**
Notwithstanding RSA 28:8, the procedures for competitive bidding in
Hillsborough county shall be as follows:
                                             
 I. All purchases made by Hillsborough county for materials,
equipment, supplies, services, insurance, building repairs or any other
item, in an amount exceeding 
                                             $5,000 shall be by competitive bidding.
Awards for such purchases shall be made to the lowest responsible
bidder. Orders for purchases to be delivered at different times where
the single delivery may be less than 
                                             $5,000, but the total order
exceeds that amount shall be construed as coming within the provisions
of this section requiring competitive bidding.
                                             
 II. In determining "lowest responsible bidder'', in addition to
price, the following shall be considered:
                                             
 (a) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
                                             
 (b) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
                                             
 (c) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience
and efficiency of the bidder;
                                             
 (d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or
services;
                                             
 (e) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
                                             
 (f) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
                                             
 (g) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
                                             
 (h) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
                                             
 (i) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
                                             
 III. All bids in an amount exceeding 
                                             $5,000 sought pursuant to this
section shall be subject to review by the executive committee. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the executive committee
from establishing further guidelines and procedures to be followed in
purchasing and bidding.
                                             
 IV. If the cost of the service is fixed by law, competitive bidding
shall not be required.
                                             
 V. If the proposed purchase is manufactured by only one company, or
if it is deemed advisable to make a purchase from a specific company to
reduce costs of maintaining additional parts, the county commissioners,
at the request of the department concerned, are authorized to waive
competitive bidding procedures, subject to review of this decision by
the executive committee.
                                             
 VI. Competitive bidding by a department shall not be required if
items can be procured through the state of New Hampshire, department of
administrative services, division of procurement and support services
either by direct purchase or from the state supplier at the state price,
provided the department files a full report with the county
commissioners and with the executive committee.
                                             
 VII. Competitive bidding shall not be required where a department is
able to negotiate prices for items of purchase that are lower than bid
prices for the same material in the same transportation zone, provided
the department files a full report with the county commissioners and
with the executive committee substantiating the fact.
                                             
 VIII. Competitive bidding shall be interpreted to include guaranteed
annual cost purchasing whenever applicable whenever this factor is
considered to be of value in obtaining the lowest possible annual cost
for the department, insofar as this is in agreement with the line item
budget appropriation established in the county budget.
                                             
 IX. In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchase of
supplies or contractual services, the department concerned is authorized
to secure by open market procedure, at the lowest obtainable price, any
supplies or contractual services regardless of the amount of the
expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of the emergency
purchase shall be filed with the county commissioners and with the
executive committee and shall be open to public inspection.
                                             
 X. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1975, 401:1. 1979, 200:4. 1985, 60:2, eff. June 28, 1985.
1998, 50:2, eff. July 4, 1998. 2014, 327:51, eff. Aug. 2, 2014.

### Section 28:8-f

 **28:8-f Competitive Bidding in Rockingham County. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this section shall apply to all county
departments in Rockingham county, and to the offices of county sheriff,
county attorney, county treasurer, and register of deeds in Rockingham
county.
                                             
 II. Any purchase of equipment, materials, services, or leases made
by Rockingham county in an amount exceeding 
                                             $5,000 shall be by
competitive bidding, provided that the county commissioners by an
affirmative vote of all 3 commissioners may waive the provisions for
such bidding. In case the commissioners so vote, a copy of such action
shall be recorded in their offices with a statement of the reason
therefor and such record shall be open to public inspection. Purchases
of equipment, material, services, or leases to be provided at different
times where the cost of a single order or delivery may be less than

                                             $5,000 but the total purchase exceeds that amount shall be construed as
coming within the provisions hereof requiring competitive bidding.

**Source.** 1995, 141:1, eff. July 1, 1995. 1998, 50:3, eff. July 4,
1998.

### Section 28:9

 **28:9 Assisted Persons. –** They shall have the charge and care of
county assisted persons, and shall provide for their support upon the
county farm or elsewhere as required by law; and when expedient they may
appoint agents in the several towns to investigate applications and look
after the county poor in such towns.

**Source.** 1855, 1659:37. 1860, 2349:1. GS 24:5. GL 25:5. PS 27:6.
1901, 39:1. PL 38:8. RL 47:9. RSA 28:9. 1985, 380:47, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 28:10

 **28:10 Employees, Counties. –** The commissioners of each county
shall employ such number of clerks and agents as said commissioners deem
necessary. In Hillsborough county the county commissioner, any elected
or appointed official, prior to establishing any new position within
said county, shall obtain written approval from the Hillsborough county
executive committee for such new position.

**Source.** 1909, 83:1. 1913, 2:1; 44:1; 136:1. 1917, 201:1. 1919, 45:1.
1921, 149:1. 1925, 171:2. PL 38:29. 1937, 206:1. RL 47:28. 1945, 119:1.
RSA 28:10. 1969, 181:1. 1973, 381:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 28:10-a

 **28:10-a Discharge or Suspension From Employment. –**
                                             
 I. Before any county may discharge, remove, or suspend an employee
as provided in paragraphs II-IV, the county commissioners shall first
adopt and establish rules and procedures for the discharge, removal, or
suspension of its employees. Each county employee shall receive a copy
of the rules and procedures which the county adopts. Nothing in this
section shall be construed so as to limit negotiations under, or the
applicability of, RSA 273-A. In the event that rules or procedures
adopted by the county commissioners conflict with an agreement
negotiated pursuant to RSA 273-A, the provisions of the collective
bargaining agreement shall prevail.
                                             
 II. Any employee of a county institution who has served at least one
year shall not be discharged, removed, or suspended from employment
except for dishonesty, intoxication, immoral behavior or other
misconduct, neglect of duty, negligence, willful insubordination, lack
of cooperation, inefficiency, incapacity or unfitness to perform his
duties, or for the good of the institution to which he is assigned, and
subject to the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) Prior to the discharge or removal of any such employee, a
statement of the grounds and reasons for the discharge or removal shall
be prepared by the county commissioners and signed by a majority of the
county commissioners. Notice of the grounds and reasons shall be given
to said employee not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to
the effective date of such discharge or removal.
                                             
 (b) Any such employee may be suspended at any time, without prior
notice, for a period not to exceed 10 days.
                                             
 III. Within 30 days of receipt of the notice under subparagraph
II(a), or within 10 days of the first day of suspension under
subparagraph II(b), the employee may request in writing a public hearing
on such notice or suspension before the county personnel committee,
consisting of the chairman, vice-chairman and clerk of the county
convention, except if said employee is covered by a collective
bargaining agreement under RSA 273-A, in which case the employee's
hearing and discharge, removal, or suspension proceedings shall be held
pursuant to the provisions of the agreement. If, upon such hearing, said
committee finds good cause for discharge, removal, or suspension of the
employee, they shall approve his discharge, removal, or suspension as
ordered or approved by the county commissioners. The personnel committee
may establish reasonable rules for procedure and the admission of
evidence and shall keep a record of all proceedings under this section.
Any action or decision made under this section shall be subject to
rehearing and appeal as provided in RSA 541. The county personnel
committee, when acting under the provisions of this section, shall be
deemed a commission within the meaning of RSA 541:1.
                                             
 IV. The salary of said employee shall terminate or be suspended on
the effective date of his discharge, removal, or suspension; provided,
however, that if the employee has been discharged, removed, or suspended
without good cause, he shall be reinstated to his former position
without loss of pay for the period of suspension and shall be reimbursed
for his legal costs and reasonable attorneys' fees as determined by the
personnel committee or, in the event of appeal from its ruling, by the
supreme court. This section shall not apply to county employees laid off
by reason of abolition of a position, change in organization, lack of
work, or insufficient funds.
                                             
 V. For purposes of this section, the term "employee'' shall not
include individuals who are employed on a per diem, on call, or seasonal
basis, or are part-time less than 20 hours per week, or otherwise
employed on an infrequent basis.

**Source.** 1959, 295:1. 1963, 113:1. 1977, 9:1. 1983, 156:1. 1986,
71:1. 1988, 89:5, eff. June 17, 1988. 2011, 153:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2011.

### Section 28:10-b

 **28:10-b Jurisdiction. –** The jurisdiction of the county personnel
committee to conduct discharge, removal, or suspension hearings shall be
limited to those cases not involving death of a county employee or any
person under the care or custody of a county employee. Whenever the
county personnel committee finds that a case involves a death of a
county employee or any person under the care or custody of a county
employee, the committee shall immediately transfer the case to superior
court. Any determination made by the county personnel committee that a
case involves the death of a county employee or any person under the
care or custody of a county employee shall be inadmissible as evidence
in any civil action, arising from such death, against the county or any
county official or employee.

**Source.** 1981, 102:1. 1986, 71:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 28:10-c

 **28:10-c Employee Candidate Background Checks. –**
                                             
 I. The county commissioners may require a background investigation
and a criminal history records check on any candidate for employment,
prior to a final offer of employment. A county may request only a state
records check or both a federal and state records check, to be conducted
through the division of state police. The county may extend a
conditional offer of employment to a candidate, with a final offer of
employment subject to a successfully completed criminal history records
check.
                                             
 II. A candidate for employment in a position that the county
commissioners determine requires a background investigation and a
criminal history records check shall submit to the county a notarized
criminal history records release form, as provided by the division of
state police, which authorizes the release of the person's criminal
records, if any. The candidate shall submit with the release form a
complete set of fingerprints taken by a law enforcement agency as
directed by the county commissioners. In the event that the first set of
fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern and a second set of
fingerprints is necessary in order to complete the criminal history
records check, the conditional offer of employment shall remain in
effect. If, after 2 attempts, a set of fingerprints is invalid due to
insufficient pattern, the county may, in lieu of the criminal history
records check, accept police clearances from every city, town, or county
where a candidate has lived during the past 5 years.
                                             
 III. To obtain a state records check only, the county shall submit a
state criminal history records release form to the division of state
police. To obtain both the federal and the state records check, the
county shall submit the criminal history records release form and
applicant fingerprint card to the division of state police, which shall
conduct a criminal history records check through its records and through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the background
investigation, the division of state police shall report any criminal
conviction information to the county commissioners. The county may
submit fingerprint information electronically, in accordance with
procedures established by the division of state police. The county shall
maintain the confidentiality and security of all criminal history
records information received pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 IV. The county commissioners may require the candidate to pay the
actual costs of the background investigation and the criminal history
records check.
                                             
 V. In this section, "candidate for employment'' shall include
candidates for volunteer positions in the county.

**Source.** 2013, 147:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2013.

County Farm and County Department of Corrections
------------------------------------------------

### Section 28:11

 **28:11 Personnel. –** The commissioners of each county shall
appoint an administrator for the county nursing home and, if the county
has a correctional facility, the county commissioners shall appoint a
superintendent for the county department of corrections. They may also
appoint such other officers, agents, and employees as may be required to
properly care for the same and their inmates.

**Source.** RS 116:1. CS 122:1. 1855, 1659:37. 1863, 2735:1. GS 24:4. GL
25:4. PS 27:7. PL 38:9. RL 47:10. RSA 28:11. 1973, 150:1. 1981, 105:1;
227:2. 1988, 89:4, eff. June 17, 1988. 2007, 93:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 28:11-a

 **28:11-a Superintendent of Belknap County House of Correction. –**

                                             [Repealed 1981, 227:6, eff. Aug. 10, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 28:12

 **28:12 Rules and Regulations. –** The county commissioners may
adopt rules and regulations for the governing and administration of
county departments of corrections, including county farms, county
nursing homes, county welfare offices and any other county departments
under the jurisdiction of the county commissioners.

**Source.** RS 116:1. CS 122:1. 1855, 1659:37. 1863, 2735:1. GS 24:4. GL
25:4. PS 27:7. PL 38:10. RL 47:11. RSA 28:12. 1981, 227:4. 1988, 89:6,
eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 28:13

 **28:13 Ineligibility to be Superintendent. –** No county
commissioner shall be superintendent of the county farm or the county
department of corrections, or administrator of the county nursing home.

**Source.** 1889, 52:1. PS 27:8. PL 38:11. RL 47:12. RSA 28:13. 1971,
495:2. 1981, 227:3. 1988, 89:7, eff. June 17, 1988. 2007, 93:3, eff.
Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 28:13-a

 **28:13-a Superintendent of Strafford County Farm. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1981, 105:2, eff. June 22, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 28:13-b

 **28:13-b Filling Vacancy, Superintendent of Strafford County Farm.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 105:3, eff. June 22, 1981.
                                             ]

Claims Against and by Counties
------------------------------

### Section 28:14

 **28:14 Allowance. –** They shall audit and allow all claims against
or in favor of the county, excepting those which the superior court is
authorized by law to adjust and allow.

**Source.** 1865, 4077:1. GS 24:8. GL 25:8. PS 27:10. PL 38:12. RL
47:13. RSA 28:14. 1967, 132:2, eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 28:15

 **28:15 Vouchers; Payment. –** No assisted person bill, and no bill
or claim of a superintendent of the county department of corrections
against the county, shall be allowed by the county commissioners unless
it is accompanied by proper vouchers for all payments charged therein,
and is supported by an affidavit of the claimant, or some one in his
behalf, that the same is a just and true account; and no such bill or
claim shall be paid by the county treasurer without the allowance of the
county commissioners.

**Source.** 1864, 2880:1. GS 24:9. GL 25:9. PS 27:11. PL 38:13. RL
47:14. RSA 28:15. 1985, 380:47. 1988, 89:8, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 28:16

 **28:16 Disputed Claims. –** If any disagreement shall arise between
any claimant and the commissioners, relative to any claim in favor of or
against the county, the same may be submitted to the court for decision.

**Source.** GS 24:10. GL 25:10. PS 27:13. PL 38:14. RL 47:15.

### Section 28:17

 **28:17 Suits. –** The county commissioners shall direct such
proceedings to be commenced for the recovery of fines, penalties,
forfeitures, costs and other claims due the county as they deem the
interests of the county require, and such proceedings shall be subject
to their direction and control.

**Source.** 1865, 4077:4. GS 24:14. GL 25:14. PS 27:14. PL 38:15. RL
47:16.

### Section 28:17-a

 **28:17-a Legal Counsel. –** The county commissioners shall have the
authority to hire, within the limit of appropriations, legal counsel to
advise them on county affairs and to issue opinions relating to county
matters, provided that such counsel shall not be employed to defend the
commissioners individually or collectively in private legal matters.

**Source.** 1975, 295:1, eff. Aug. 6, 1975.

### Section 28:18

 **28:18 Expenses of Suits. –** No claim for any services, fees or
costs rendered or incurred in actions brought for or against the county
shall be allowed unless they were authorized in writing by the county
commissioners.

**Source.** 1865, 4077:4. GS 24:14. GL 25:14. PS 27:14. PL 38:16. RL
47:17.

### Section 28:19

 **28:19 Compromise. –** No action or proceeding for the recovery of
anything due to the county shall be compromised or settled except by the
county commissioners, or by their direction in writing.

**Source.** 1865, 4077:5. GS 24:15. GL 25:15. PS 27:15. PL 38:17. RL
47:18.

Accounts
--------

### Section 28:20

 **28:20 Record. –** A record of all receipts and payments of county
funds shall be made by the county treasurer in the county receipts and
payments book, prescribed by the commissioner of revenue administration,
showing, in the case of receipts, the date, source and amount, and, in
the case of payments, the name of the payee, the voucher number and
amount, properly classified according to the uniform classification
prescribed by said commissioner.

**Source.** 1878, 44:3. GL 28:3. PS 27:12. 1921, 5:1. PL 38:18. RL
47:19. RSA 28:20. 1973, 544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 28:21

 **28:21 Vouchers. –** The vouchers shall be filed, according to the
numbers appearing in the county receipts and payments book, in the
office of the county commissioners.

**Source.** 1921, 5:1. PL 38:19. RL 47:20.

### Section 28:22

 **28:22 Court Orders. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 383:79, I, eff. July 1,
1984.
                                             ]

County Bonds
------------

### Section 28:23

 **28:23 Issue. –** When so authorized by the county convention, the
county commissioners may issue bonds of their county, to raise money for
its uses, subject to the provisions of RSA 33. Said bonds shall be
signed by 2 at least of the commissioners, and shall be countersigned by
the treasurer.

**Source.** 1860, 2368:1. GS 24:17. GL 25:17. PS 27:16. PL 38:21. RL
47:22. RSA 28:23. 1969, 383:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1969.

### Section 28:24

 **28:24 Sale. –** All county bonds and notes, except tax
anticipation notes maturing in less than one year, shall be sold at
public sealed bidding to the highest bidder; provided, however, that the
county commissioners may reject any and all bids and may negotiate for
said sale upon terms which they deem most advantageous to the county.
Any bond sold under the provisions of this chapter shall not be sold for
less than par.

**Source.** 1860, 2368:2. GS 24:18. 1869, 2:1. GL 25:18. PS 27:17. PL
38:22. RL 47:23. RSA 28:24. 1969, 383:2. 1971, 485:1. 1983, 365:3, eff.
June 19, 1983.

Recopying Public Records
------------------------

### Section 28:25

 **28:25 Authorization. –** The county commissioners may authorize
and direct the register of deeds to make, at the expense of the county,
in suitable books, true copies of any of the public records in his or
her office which have become so faded, worn out or otherwise defaced
that, in his or her judgment, it is necessary they should be copied in
order to insure the preservation of such records.

**Source.** 1881, 19:1. 1885, 59:1. PS 27:18. PL 38:23. RL 47:24. RSA
28:25. 1983, 383:10, eff. July 1, 1984. 2008, 322:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 28:26

 **28:26 Certification. –** The officer making such copies shall
attach thereto certificates of their correctness, and showing when, by
whom and under what authority made.

**Source.** 1881, 19:1. 1885, 59:1. PS 27:18. PL 38:24. RL 47:25.

### Section 28:27

 **28:27 Effect. –** Such copies shall have the same force and effect
as the originals, and copies made therefrom may be used in evidence the
same as if made from the originals, without showing the loss of the
latter; but the originals shall also be preserved.

**Source.** 1881, 19:1. 1885, 59:1. PS 27:18. PL 38:25. RL 47:26.

Compensation
------------

### Section 28:28

 **28:28 Salaries. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, VII, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 28:28-a

 **28:28-a Cheshire County Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971,
514:18, VIII, eff. Jan. 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 28:28-b

 **28:28-b Grafton County Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18,
IX, eff. Jan. 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 28:28-c

 **28:28-c Rockingham County Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971,
514:18, X, eff. Jan. 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 28:28-d

 **28:28-d Belknap County Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18,
XI, eff. Jan. 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 28:28-e

 **28:28-e Strafford County Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971,
514:18, XXX, eff. Jan. 1, 1973.
                                             ]
