---
title: |
    CHAPTER 29-A DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF COUNTY OFFICERS AND
    EMPLOYEES
---

TITLE II
                                             
COUNTIES
=========

CHAPTER 29-A
                                             
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF COUNTY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 29-A:1

 **29-A:1 Statement of Policy. –** It is the intent of this chapter
to protect county officers, trustees, officials and employees who are
subject to claims and civil actions arising from acts committed within
the scope of their official duty while in the course of their employment
for the county. It is not intended to create a new remedy for injured
persons, nor to waive the sovereign immunity of the county which is
extended by law to county officers, trustees, officials and employees.
The doctrine of sovereign immunity of the state, extended to the
counties by law, and the extension of that doctrine to officers,
trustees, officials or employees of the county or any agency thereof
acting within the scope of official duty and not in a wanton or reckless
manner, except as otherwise provided by statute, is hereby adopted as
the law of the state.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980.

### Section 29-A:2

 **29-A:2 Defense and Indemnification. –** If any claim is made or
any civil action is commenced against any present or former officer,
trustee, official, or employee of any county, or any agency thereof,
seeking equitable relief or claiming damages for the negligent or
wrongful acts of any such person and said officer, trustee, official, or
employee requests the county to provide representation for him or her
and the county commissioners, or, in the case of a claim or civil action
commenced against the county commissioners, the county convention,
determine that the acts complained of were committed by said officer,
trustee, official, or employee while acting within the scope of official
duty for the county and that said acts were not wanton or reckless, in
the absence of other legal representation, the county attorney shall
represent and defend such person with respect to such claim or civil
action throughout such action or shall, with the consent of the county
commissioners, retain outside counsel so to represent or defend such
person; and the county shall defray all costs of such representation or
defense, to be paid from funds not otherwise appropriated. In such case
the county shall also protect, indemnify, and hold harmless such person
from any costs, damages, awards, judgments, or settlements arising from
said claim or suit. The county commissioners or county convention shall
not be required to consider the request of such person that
representation be provided for the person unless within 7 days of the
time such person is served with any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand, or pleading he or she shall deliver the original or a copy
thereof to the county commissioners or, in the case of an action against
the county commissioners, to the clerk of the county convention. No
property either real or personal of any county shall be subject to
attachment or execution to secure payment of or to satisfy any
obligations of the county created under this chapter. Upon entry of
final judgment in any action brought under this chapter the county
commissioners shall present such judgment to the county convention for
the requisite appropriation. The county attorney or outside counsel
retained under this chapter shall have the authority, with the
concurrence of the county commissioners, to settle any claim brought
under this chapter by compromise; and the county commissioners shall
present said settlement to the county convention for the requisite
appropriation.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980. 2003, 319:168, eff. July 1,
2003.

### Section 29-A:3

 **29-A:3 Insurance. –** Any county may self-insure against all such
damages, losses and expenses to the extent the same are not otherwise
covered by insurance purchased by the county.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980.

### Section 29-A:4

 **29-A:4 Evidence. –** Any determination by the county commissioners
or county convention pursuant to RSA 29-A:2 shall not be admissible as
evidence in the trial of any such action or claim.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980.

### Section 29-A:5

 **29-A:5 Counsel. –** Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to deprive any such person of his right to select and be
represented by private counsel of his own choice at his own expense.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980.

### Section 29-A:6

 **29-A:6 Defenses not Waived. –** Nothing contained in this chapter
shall be construed or held to constitute a waiver of any defense,
including that of sovereign immunity, otherwise available against the
claim.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980.

### Section 29-A:7

 **29-A:7 Appeal. –** Appeal from denial of representation by the
county commissioners as provided in RSA 29-A:2 shall be available to any
officer, trustee, official or employee who is so denied. Such appeal
shall be by petition to the county convention.

**Source.** 1979, 114:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1980.
