---
title: 'CHAPTER 30-B COUNTY DEPARTMENTS OF CORRECTIONS'
---

TITLE II
                                             
COUNTIES
=========

CHAPTER 30-B
                                             
COUNTY DEPARTMENTS OF CORRECTIONS
---------------------------------

Facilities
----------

### Section 30-B:1

 **30-B:1 County Department of Corrections. –**
                                             
 I. A county may provide, keep, and maintain facilities, administered
by a county department of corrections, for the reception and confinement
of prisoners committed to or ordered to be detained at a county
correctional facility.
                                             
 II. A county may contract with the state or another county for the
reception and confinement of prisoners committed to or who are ordered
to be detained at a county correctional facility. All expenses related
to the confinement of prisoners pursuant to this paragraph shall be a
charge upon the county sending such prisoners unless other arrangements
are made.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2007, 93:4, eff. Aug. 10,
2007.

### Section 30-B:2

 **30-B:2 Real Estate; Buildings. –** In accordance with RSA 28:7,
when authorized by the county convention, the county commissioners may
purchase such real estate as may be required for a county correctional
facility; and may repair, enlarge, or erect county buildings housing
county correctional facilities; and may sell any of the county's real
estate. As provided in RSA 72:23, II, county correctional facilities
shall be exempt from taxation except that county farms and their lands,
buildings, and taxable personal property shall be taxed.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2007, 93:5, eff. Aug. 10,
2007.

Administration of Department of Corrections
-------------------------------------------

### Section 30-B:3

 **30-B:3 Superintendent; Other Personnel; Appointment. –**
                                             
 I. The county commissioners of a county which operates a county
correctional facility shall appoint a superintendent of the county
department of corrections, to supervise and manage the county department
of corrections. The commissioners may also appoint such other officers,
agents, and employees as may be required to properly care for prisoners
committed to or detained at county correctional facilities.
                                             
 II. No county commissioner shall be superintendent of the county
department of corrections.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2007, 93:6, eff. Aug. 10,
2007.

### Section 30-B:4

 **30-B:4 Superintendent; General Duties and Powers. –** The
superintendent of the county department of corrections, as an agent of
the county commissioners, shall be vested with all of the powers and
subject to all the duties and limitations provided in this and other
chapters relative to the management of county correctional facilities.
These shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
                                             
 I. The superintendent shall report to the board of county
commissioners of his county and be answerable to it for the efficient
and effective operation of county correctional facilities.
                                             
 I-a. The superintendent shall manage all operations of the
department and administer and enforce the laws with which the department
is charged.
                                             
 I-b. The superintendent shall have every power enumerated in the
laws, whether granted to the superintendent, the department, or any
administrative unit of the department. In accordance with these
provisions, the superintendent shall:
                                             
 (a) Annually compile a budget which reflects all fiscal matters
related to the operation of the department and each program and activity
of the department.
                                             
 (b) Exercise general supervisory authority over all department
employees, in accordance with applicable personnel statutes and rules.
                                             
 I-c. The superintendent shall adopt such reasonable policies and
procedures necessary to carry out the duties of the department
consistent with this chapter.
                                             
 I-d. The superintendent shall not accept, on behalf of the
department, any grants of money without first obtaining the express
consent of the board of commissioners.
                                             
 II. The superintendent shall, under the supervision of the county
commissioners, have custody of all the inmates confined to those
facilities.
                                             
 III. (a) The superintendent shall, in person or by agent, receive
all persons sent by lawful authority to the county department of
corrections and retain them until they are released by process
appropriate under law, except as provided in subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (b) Whenever a person in the custody of the superintendent under
subparagraph (a) is transported to a state court, the sheriff through
the sheriff's deputies and bailiffs shall be responsible for custody and
control of such person during the time period such person is in the
courthouse.
                                             
 IV. The superintendent shall monthly present to the presiding or
designated justice and the clerk of the superior court in the county a
certified list of all pretrial prisoners who are or have been in custody
with the times and causes of their confinements or discharges.
                                             
 V. The superintendent shall provide each prisoner in his or her
custody with necessary sustenance, clothing, bedding, shelter, and
medical care.
                                             
 VI. The superintendent of the county department of corrections shall
cause to be kept a correct and itemized account of each employed
prisoner's earnings and debits made and incurred on their account, and
shall retain the balance of those earnings in escrow until the prisoner
is discharged from the county department of corrections, whereupon the
superintendent shall cause the prisoner to be paid the amount due and
take a receipt.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 1998, 297:2, eff. Jan. 1,
1999. 2003, 237:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 30-B:5

 **30-B:5 Removal of Superintendents, Officers, and Employees. –**
The provisions of RSA 28:10-a, relative to the discharge or suspension
from employment of county employees, shall apply to superintendents,
officers, and employees appointed by the county commissioners under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:6

 **30-B:6 Policies; Rules and Regulations. –**
                                             
 I. The county commissioners shall establish policies and procedures
for the management of the county department of corrections as authorized
in RSA 28:12.
                                             
 II. The commissioners shall adopt any necessary rules and
regulations for the fulfillment of the powers and duties of the
superintendent.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:7

 **30-B:7 Discipline of Inmates. –** If any inmate in a county
correctional facility is refractory and stubborn, and refuses to work or
to perform his work in a proper manner, the superintendent may put him
in close confinement until he submits to perform his task and obey the
superintendent's orders.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:8

 **30-B:8 Escapes. –**
                                             
 I. If an offender escapes from a county correctional facility the
superintendent shall have the power to pursue, retake, and bring him
back, and to require all necessary aid for the purpose and, when taken,
may place the prisoner in administrative segregation, in accordance with
the standards of the facility from which he escaped, until the
superintendent has determined that the prisoner is willing to submit to
the regulations of the facility.
                                             
 II. The provisions and penalties of RSA 642:6 and 642:7 on escape
and implements for escape and other contraband shall apply to any
escapes from the official custody of the superintendent under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:9

 **30-B:9 Delivery of Articles Prohibited. –** No person shall
deliver or procure to be delivered or have in his possession with intent
to deliver to a prisoner confined in a county correctional facility, or
deposit or conceal in any building or upon any land appurtenant thereto,
any article with intent that a prisoner shall receive or obtain it, or
receive from a prisoner any article with intent to convey it out of said
county correctional facility without the knowledge of the superintendent
of the county department of corrections; nor shall any prisoner deliver
or procure to be delivered or have in his possession, or deposit or
conceal in any building or land appurtenant thereto, or convey out of
any county correctional facility, any article without the knowledge of
the superintendent of the county department of corrections.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:10

 **30-B:10 Penalty for Delivery of Articles. –**
                                             
 I. A person convicted of violating any of the provisions of RSA
30-B:9 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except as provided in paragraph
II.
                                             
 II. A person convicted of violating any of the provisions of RSA
30-B:9, if the article involved is a weapon, article that may be used to
escape from the facility, or any article the possession of which is
unlawful, shall be guilty of a class B felony; otherwise, the person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for such a violation.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:11

 **30-B:11 Use of Force. –** Law enforcement officers in county
correctional facilities may use physical force as provided in RSA 627:5.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2003, 237:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2004.

### Section 30-B:12

 **30-B:12 Inspection of Corrections Facilities. –** At least every 6
months the county commissioners shall make a proper examination into the
management, condition, and security of the condition of the inmates in
county correctional facilities. The commissioners shall, within one
month after such inspection, make a written report to the attorney
general of their findings and actions or proposed actions on such
findings.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:13

 **30-B:13 Reporting Requirements. –** The superintendent shall be
subject to the following laws relative to bills, accounts, and
reporting:
                                             
 I. RSA 28:15, relative to payment of vouchers.
                                             
 II. RSA 30:1, relative to annual reports.
                                             
 III. RSA 30:3, relative to the contents and form of annual reports.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:14

 **30-B:14 Superintendent's Bills. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 237:15, eff.
Jan. 1, 2004.
                                             ]

Commitment of Offenders
-----------------------

### Section 30-B:15

 **30-B:15 Place of Commitment; Expense of Protective Custody. –**
                                             
 I. For any person sentenced to a term of imprisonment of up to 12
months, the expense of lodging such person in a county correctional
facility shall be a charge upon the county in which the offense was
committed. For persons sentenced to terms of imprisonment in a county
correctional facility that exceed 12 months, the first 12-month sentence
shall be a charge upon the county. Any sentence exceeding 12 months of
imprisonment shall be a charge upon the state.
                                             
 II. Whenever the expense of lodging a person in a county
correctional facility is to be a charge against the state under this
section, the state shall have the authority to take physical custody of
such person.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2003, 96:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2004; 237:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2004 at 12:01 a.m. 2005, 275:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2006. 2007, 93:7, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 30-B:16

 **30-B:16 Federal Prisoners. –** The superintendent of the county
department of corrections, may receive and keep every person duly
committed thereto for any offense against the United States paying all
expenses for the confinement and safekeeping of such person, at a rate
established by the county commissioners of the county where such
facility is located.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

Employment of Offenders
-----------------------

### Section 30-B:17

 **30-B:17 Employment of Prisoners. –** All persons sentenced to
imprisonment in a county department of corrections facility shall work
under rules and regulations prescribed by the superintendent of the
county department of corrections or the county commissioners of the
county in which such facility is located.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:18

 **30-B:18 Prisoners Awaiting Trial. –** Any prisoner confined to a
county correctional facility while awaiting trial in the superior court
or for any other cause, who is not likely to flee or commit an act of
violence, and who wishes to work, may do so voluntarily upon approval of
the superintendent, subject to rules and regulations of the correctional
facility.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2003, 237:4, eff. Jan. 1,
2004.

### Section 30-B:19

 **30-B:19 Application of Earnings. –**
                                             
 I. The wages or salaries from the work of all persons held for trial
or for any other cause or sentenced to imprisonment in a county
department of corrections facility shall be disbursed by the
superintendent for:
                                             
 (a) Restitution or reparation or both, to the victim of his
conduct for the damage or injury which was sustained, in a sum and
manner determined by the court.
                                             
 (b) The cost of board and all other expenses of the county
maintaining the facility with the county of commitment receiving a
credit for the cost of board and all other expenses.
                                             
 (c) Payment of a fine.
                                             
 (d) Incidental expenses of the person so employed.
                                             
 (e) Support of the person's dependents, if any.
                                             
 (f) The account of the person so employed which shall be payable
to such person upon discharge.
                                             
 II. The county commissioners of each county may require sentenced
inmates to pay a portion of their income payable to them from sources
other than wages or salaries, to offset the costs of incarceration, when
sanctioned by the sentencing court. In setting the amount of such
payments, the court shall take into consideration and make allowances
for the maintenance and support of an inmate's spouse, dependent
children, or any other persons having a legal right to support and
maintenance by the inmate.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 1998, 209:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1999.

### Section 30-B:20

 **30-B:20 Work Release. –** A sentencing court may order that any
person sentenced to imprisonment in a county department of corrections
facility may be released therefrom by the superintendent with the
approval of the sentencing court at the time of sentence, or at any time
during the term of sentence based on the rules and regulations of the
county correctional facility for such purposes as the superintendent may
deem conducive to his or her rehabilitation. Such release shall be for
such terms or intervals of time and under such terms and conditions as
may be permitted by the facility's rules and regulations or as the court
may order. Any part of a day spent in the free community under such a
release order shall be counted as a full day toward the serving of the
sentence unless otherwise provided by the sentencing court.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2003, 237:9, eff. Jan. 1,
2004.

### Section 30-B:21

 **30-B:21 Temporary Removal or Transfer. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Any person confined in a county department of corrections
facility may be transferred by the superintendent of the transferring
county department of corrections to any other county department of
corrections facility or to the county department of corrections in
another county when such transfer is in the public interest and subject
to the approval of the county commissioners of the county to which the
transfer is planned for the purpose of facilitating work release or for
other good cause shown.
                                             
 (b) The superintendent may transfer a prisoner, without the
approval of the county commissioners, if the superintendent determines
the transfer is necessary for public safety or emergency reasons. The
county commissioners shall review any such transfer at their next
regular meeting. If the county commissioners reject the transfer, the
prisoner shall be returned to the facility from which the prisoner came
as soon as practicable.
                                             
 II. The expense of transfer and maintenance shall be paid by the
transferring county, unless waived by the receiving county department of
corrections in accordance with a reciprocal or other arrangement between
the counties involved. The superintendent of the transferring county
department of corrections shall have custody over the prisoner during
the transfer by a regular or specially authorized officer of that
county. Upon admittance to the receiving facility, the prisoner shall be
under the custody of the superintendent of the receiving county
department of corrections. A prisoner shall have the right to contest
any transfer under this section or to request a transfer by petition to
the sentencing court. If a prisoner contests a transfer, the
superintendent of the transferring county department of corrections may
proceed with the transfer pending the outcome of the petition to the
sentencing court.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1. 1991, 316:2. 1993, 302:1, eff. June 23, 1993.
2011, 65:1, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 30-B:22

 **30-B:22 Removal of Prisoners for Public Safety or Emergency
Reasons or Because of Epidemic or Repairs to Facility. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever the prevalence of disease, or the rebuilding or
repairing of a correctional facility or for other cause, the
superintendent of the county department of corrections shall think it
expedient that the prisoners be removed therefrom, the county
commissioners may authorize the superintendent to remove the prisoners
to some other facility in the same or another county location, there to
be detained, in the same manner and by the same process as in the
correctional facility from which they were so removed, until removed by
similar process or discharged according to law.
                                             
 II. The superintendent may remove a prisoner, without the approval
of the county commissioners, if the superintendent determines the
removal is necessary for public safety or emergency reasons. The county
commissioners shall review any such removal at their next regular
meeting. If the county commissioners reject the removal, the prisoner
shall be returned to the facility from which the prisoner came as soon
as practicable.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2003, 237:13, eff. Jan. 1,
2004. 2011, 65:2, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 30-B:23

 **30-B:23 Expense of Removal. –** The expenses of removing and
maintaining prisoners incurred under RSA 30-B:22 shall be defrayed by
the county from which they are removed.

**Source.** 1988, 89:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 30-B:24

 **30-B:24 Transfer of Female Prisoners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 237:15,
eff. Jan. 1, 2004.
                                             ]

County Transport and Custody Officers
-------------------------------------

### Section 30-B:25

 **30-B:25 County Transport and Custody Officers. –** The county
commissioners may appoint county transport and custody officers,
consisting of selected members of the county department of corrections
line personnel identified by the superintendent, for the purpose of
patrolling county department of corrections buildings, roads, and
grounds, and providing for general security at the county correctional
facility. If transport and custody officers are appointed, the county
commissioners shall adopt a written policy establishing rules relating
to the control and responsibility of the transport and custody officers.
The policy shall include a requirement for training designed for the
specific functions of the transport and custody officers as prescribed
in this subdivision, including education on the power of arrest,
firearms training and certification, and defensive driving.

**Source.** 2013, 194:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2013.

### Section 30-B:26

 **30-B:26 Powers and Duties. –** All transport and custody officers
shall be ex officio constables and shall possess limited powers of
arrest which shall only extend to the confines of the grounds of the
county correctional facility and to the period during which such
officers are on official active duty. The 2 instances where the
authority of the transport and custody officers shall extend beyond the
county correctional facility grounds, and during which time the
transport and custody officers may utilize blue lights on vehicles
pursuant to RSA 266:78-b, are:
                                             
 I. Where a county transport and custody officer is in hot pursuit of
a person who has committed a crime or violation by interfering with the
maintenance of custody and control; or
                                             
 II. Where a county transport and custody officer is transporting or
assisting in the transport of a committed inmate, including, but not
limited to, medical transports and transports involving a committed
inmate who is receiving services in a health care setting.

**Source.** 2013, 194:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2013.
