---
title: CHAPTER 568 INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS
---

TITLE LVII
                                             
INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS AND ASSIGNMENTS FOR CREDITORS
====================================================

CHAPTER 568
                                             
INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS
----------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 568:1

 **568:1 Jurisdiction of Probate Courts. –** The court of probate of
each county shall have original jurisdiction of all cases of insolvency
arising in such county under the provisions of this chapter and shall at
all suitable times be open for the transaction of business.

**Source.** 1861, 2488. GS 126. GL 140. 1885, 85:1. PS 201:1. PL 401:1.
RL 465:1.

### Section 568:2

 **568:2 Records. –** All assignments, agreements for composition and
certificates of discharge shall be recorded in full. All other papers
shall be numbered, filed and kept in the register's office as records of
the proceedings.

**Source.** PS 201:2. PL 401:2. RL 465:2.

### Section 568:3

 **568:3 Register's Duties. –** The register shall enter all cases of
insolvency upon a docket prepared for the purpose. He shall make all
computations of dividends and may administer oaths in insolvency
proceedings.

**Source.** PS 201:3. PL 401:3. RL 465:3.

### Section 568:4

 **568:4 Warrants, etc. –** All warrants, orders of notice and
processes issuing from the court relating to insolvency shall be headed
"Proceedings in Insolvency,'' shall be under the seal of the court, and
shall be executed and obeyed throughout the state. The officer or person
to whom they are legally directed may serve the same in any county.
Warrants shall be returnable in not less than 10 nor more than 60 days
from the issuing thereof.

**Source.** 1889, 96:5. PS 201:4. PL 401:4. RL 465:4.

### Section 568:5

 **568:5 Rules of Practice. –** The judges of probate, or a majority
of them, may make rules not repugnant to law for regulating the practice
and conducting the business of the court in insolvency proceedings,
subject to approval, alteration and amendment by the supreme court.

**Source.** PS 201:5. PL 401:5. RL 465:5.

### Section 568:6

 **568:6 Assignment by Debtor to Probate Judge. –** An inhabitant of
this state owing debts which he is unable to pay, and who is not
entitled to proceed under the Bankruptcy Act, may make an assignment,
for the benefit of his creditors, of all his estate and effects not
exempt from attachment to the judge of probate for the county in which
he resides and to such assignee and his successors as the judge may
appoint. If any part of the debtor's property is real estate, the
assignment shall be executed with the formalities required in the case
of deeds of land. The assignment, however made or expressed, shall be
construed to convey all the debtor's estate not exempt from attachment
and all property which might have been taken on execution upon a
judgment against him at the beginning of the proceedings in insolvency.
He shall at the same time make, on oath, and deliver to the judge, for
the use of the messenger, a schedule containing a full and true list of
the names of his creditors, and of the place of residence of each, if
known to him.

**Source.** RS 134:1, 2. CS 140:1, 2. GS 126:1, 2. GL 140:1, 2. 1885,
85:1. PS 201:6. 1895, 68:1. PL 401:6. RL 465:6.

### Section 568:7

 **568:7 Warrant. –** If it shall appear to the satisfaction of the
judge that the applicant is not able to pay his debts in full, the judge
shall issue a warrant to the sheriff of the county, or to one of his
deputies, directing him forthwith as messenger to take possession of all
the estate of the debtor, except such as is by law exempt from
attachment, and of all his deeds, books of account and papers, to safely
keep the same until the appointment of an assignee, to send written
notices by mail or otherwise to all creditors upon the debtor's
schedule, and to publish and give such other notices as the judge may
direct. The notices shall state:
                                             
 I. That a warrant has been issued against the estate of the debtor.
                                             
 II. That the payment of any debts to or by the debtor, and the
delivery or transfer of any property by him, are forbidden.
                                             
 III. The time and place of a meeting, as stated in the warrant, at
which an assignee may be nominated by creditors whose claims have been
allowed.

**Source.** 1861, 2488:6. GS 126:10. GL 140:10. 1885, 85:2, 4, 7. 1889,
96:2. PS 201:7. PL 401:7. RL 465:7.

### Section 568:8

 **568:8 Schedules. –** The debtor shall, within 10 days after the
beginning of the proceedings, make, on oath, and file in the office of
the register a schedule of his creditors, stating the place of residence
of each, if known, the amount due each, the nature of each debt, the
true consideration thereof and any security given for its payment, a
schedule of all his estate, giving its location and description and the
nature of all encumbrances thereon, with the date, amount and
consideration for each. If by mistake, accident or misfortune the
schedules are not furnished within the 10-day period prescribed in this
section, they shall be delivered as soon as possible and before the
first meeting of the creditors.

**Source.** 1861, 2488:1. GS 126:4. 1885, 85:2. PS 201:8. PL 401:8. RL
465:8.

### Section 568:9

 **568:9 Delivery of Estate. –** The debtor shall deliver, upon
demand, to the messenger all his estate not exempt from attachment,
together with his deeds, books of account and other papers relating
thereto which are within his possession or power, and shall declare the
situation of such part thereof as is in the possession of any other
person.

**Source.** 1861, 2488:1. GS 126:4. 1885, 85:2. PS 201:8. PL 401:9. RL
465:9.

### Section 568:10

 **568:10 Perishable Property. –** If any part of the estate consists
of living animals, goods liable to perish or waste or to be greatly
reduced in value by keeping, or which cannot be kept without great
expense, the judge may order the same to be sold by the messenger in
such manner as he may deem expedient, and the money received therefor
shall be held in the place of the property.

**Source.** 1885, 85:2. 1889, 96:1. PS 201:9. PL 401:10. RL 465:10.

### Section 568:11

 **568:11 Collection of Debts. –** The judge may direct the messenger
to collect any debts due the insolvent and to begin and prosecute any
action in his name as messenger for the benefit of the estate. The
assignee, when appointed, may continue the prosecution of any action so
begun.

**Source.** PS 201:10. PL 401:11. RL 465:11.

### Section 568:12

 **568:12 Return of Warrant, etc. –** At the meeting held in
pursuance of the notice provided for in RSA 568:7, the messenger shall
make return of the warrant and of his action thereon. If it shall appear
that the required notice has not been given, the judge shall adjourn the
meeting and order further notice.

**Source.** PS 201:11. PL 401:12. RL 465:12.

### Section 568:13

 **568:13 Delivery to Assignee. –** Whenever an assignee has been
appointed and qualified, the messenger shall deliver to him all
property, books and papers in his possession belonging to the estate,
and shall file in the register's office his account, under oath, and
settle the same with the judge, with or without notice, as the judge may
direct.

**Source.** PS 201:12. PL 401:13. RL 465:13.

Proof of Claims
---------------

### Section 568:14

 **568:14 What Provable. –** All claims existing against the estate
at the beginning of the proceedings in insolvency may be proved and
allowed as of that date, whether then payable or not, with a rebate of
interest upon such claims as are not then payable and do not bear
interest. Costs taxable against the debtor in an action then pending in
which he is plaintiff and which the assignee declines to prosecute and
taxable costs incurred in good faith by a creditor before the beginning
of the proceedings in an action brought against the debtor to recover a
provable debt may also be proved and allowed.

**Source.** PS 201:13. PL 401:14. RL 465:14.

### Section 568:15

 **568:15 Manner. –** Claims shall be proved by a statement in
writing, signed by the creditor or his agent having knowledge of the
facts stated, setting forth, under oath, the claim, the consideration
therefor, any security held therefor, any payments made or credits that
should be allowed thereon and a statement that the claim is justly due
from the debtor to the creditor; if the claim is founded upon a writing,
the writing shall be attached to the proof unless lost or destroyed.
After final allowance or disallowance of the claim, the writing may, by
leave of court, be withdrawn and a copy substituted.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:2. GS 126:11. GL 140:11. 1885, 85:5. PS 201:14.
PL 401:15. RL 465:15.

### Section 568:16

 **568:16 Allowance. –** Upon proof of the claim as provided in RSA
568:15, unless objection is made by some party in interest, or the judge
shall see cause for different action, the claim shall be allowed. In
cases of mutual debts and credits, the balance only shall be allowed,
and in cases where creditors have received preferences the claims shall
not be allowed unless the preferences have been surrendered. Whenever
the judge entertains doubts as to the validity of a claim, he may
postpone its consideration until after the appointment of an assignee.

**Source.** PS 201:15. PL 401:16. RL 465:16.

### Section 568:17

 **568:17 Time. –** All claims shall be proved against the estate
within 2 months from the beginning of the insolvency proceedings. Any
claim not proved within the time limited may be proved at any time
before the final dividend. The proof of a claim shall not affect any
dividend already made, but in any subsequent dividends the claim, if
allowed, shall be a preferred claim for dividends equal to those which
have been previously made upon like claims.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:2. GS 126:11. GL 140:11, 12. 1885, 85:5. 1889,
100:1, 2. PS 201:16. PL 401:17. RL 465:17.

### Section 568:18

 **568:18 Objections. –** All objections to claims shall be made
within 4 months of the beginning of insolvency proceedings, except in
cases of claims proved after the time limited, in which cases objections
may be made within 30 days of the time of their proof.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:3. GS 126:12. GL 140:12. 1885, 85:5. PS 201:17.
PL 401:18. RL 465:18.

### Section 568:19

 **568:19 Hearings. –** All hearings in relation to the allowance of
claims shall be held within 5 months of the beginning of the
proceedings, or, in cases of claims proved after the time limited, as
soon as possible after objection is made.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:4. GS 126:13. GL 140:13. 1885, 85:5. PS 201:18.
PL 401:19. RL 465:19.

### Section 568:20

 **568:20 Rehearing. –** Claims that have been allowed may at any
time before the final dividend be reheard in the discretion of the
judge, and may be altered or disallowed if the evidence shows that they
are founded in fraud, illegality or mistake.

**Source.** PS 201:19. PL 401:20. RL 465:20.

### Section 568:21

 **568:21 Valuation of Security. –** The value of securities held by
creditors shall be determined in such manner as the court shall approve,
and such value shall be credited upon the claims so secured and the
balance only allowed, unless the creditor shall surrender the security,
in which case he may be allowed his whole claim.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:8. GS 126:15. GL 140:15. PS 201:20. PL 401:21. RL
465:21.

### Section 568:22

 **568:22 Proof by Surety. –** Whenever a creditor whose claim is
secured by the individual undertaking of any person other than the
debtor fails to prove the claim, such person may prove the same in the
name of the creditor.

**Source.** PS 201:21. PL 401:22. RL 465:22.

Assignee and Assignment
-----------------------

### Section 568:23

 **568:23 Appointment. –** The judge shall appoint as assignee such
proper person as the creditors at their first meeting shall nominate by
a vote of 2/3 in number of the creditors who have secured the allowance
of their claims and are present at the meeting in person, or by attorney
or proxy, and of a majority in value of the claims allowed. No creditor
shall be eligible as assignee, and no person who has received a
preference contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed
to vote for assignee. If the creditors fail to nominate a suitable
person, the judge shall appoint the assignee.

**Source.** 1885, 85:4, 7. 1889, 96:3. PS 201:22. PL 401:23. RL 465:23.

### Section 568:24

 **568:24 Removal; Vacancies. –** The judge may at any time remove
the assignee for cause, and shall fill all vacancies. If the assignee
does not, within 5 days after notification of his appointment, accept
the trust and file a bond in such sum as the judge shall order,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, a vacancy shall
exist in the office.

**Source.** 1885, 85:8. PS 201:23. PL 401:24. RL 465:24.

### Section 568:25

 **568:25 Notice. –** The assignee shall give such notice of his
appointment as the judge shall order.

**Source.** 1861, 2488:6. GS 126:10. GL 140:10. PS 201:24. PL 401:25. RL
465:25.

### Section 568:26

 **568:26 Inventory, etc. –** The assignee shall, within such time as
the judge may order, return into court, under oath, an inventory of all
the debtor's estate not exempt from attachment. He shall convert such
estate into money in such manner as the judge may direct.

**Source.** 1861, 2488:1. GS 126:4. 1885, 85:4. PS 201:25. PL 401:26. RL
465:26.

### Section 568:27

 **568:27 Attachments, etc. –** The proceedings in insolvency shall
dissolve all attachments of the debtor's property made within 3 months
before the beginning thereof, and all payments, pledges, mortgages,
conveyances, sales and transfers made within that time, the effect of
which, if held valid, would be to diminish the property available to the
creditors, the person to whom made having reasonable cause to believe
the debtor insolvent, or which were not made in the ordinary course of
business and for an adequate consideration, or which were made to
satisfy or secure a previously existing debt, and all pledges, payments,
mortgages, sales and transfers, whenever made, if fraudulent as to
creditors, shall be void; and the assignee may recover any amount so
paid and any property so attached, pledged, mortgaged, paid, sold or
transferred. The provisions of this section shall not affect any
existing lien for labor performed or materials furnished or any
proceedings to enforce the same.

**Source.** 1885, 85:9. PS 201:26. PL 401:27. RL 465:27.

Examination of Debtor, etc.
---------------------------

### Section 568:28

 **568:28 Procedure. –** The debtor, when required by the court upon
reasonable notice, shall appear before the judge and submit to an
examination on oath by the assignee or any creditor touching any matter
which may affect the settlement of his estate in insolvency. Upon cause
shown by affidavit of a person interested in the estate, the judge may
summon any person suspected of having fraudulently received, concealed,
embezzled or conveyed away any of the estate of the debtor, of having in
his possession any of the assets of the debtor's estate, or of having
any knowledge of anything material relating to such assets or to the
dealings of the debtor, to appear and submit to an examination in like
manner. But no evidence elicited shall be used against the person
examined in any criminal prosecution, except a prosecution for perjury
committed upon such examination.

**Source.** PS 201:27. PL 401:28. RL 465:28.

Allowance to Debtor
-------------------

### Section 568:29

 **568:29 For Support, Legal Expenses, etc. –** The debtor shall be
paid by the assignee 
                                             $1 a day for his attendance upon request of the
assignee and upon request of the judge when required. He shall also be
allowed out of his estate, for the necessary support of himself and
family, such sum not exceeding 
                                             $2 a week for each member, and for such
time not exceeding 2 months, as the judge may order. He shall also be
allowed, out of his estate, such necessary legal expenses as may be
adjudged just and reasonable by the judge.

**Source.** 1885, 85:16. PS 201:28. 1897, 32:1. PL 401:29. RL 465:29.

Accounts, Priorities, and Dividends
-----------------------------------

### Section 568:30

 **568:30 Accounts. –** Within 6 months from the beginning of the
insolvency proceedings, and at such other times as the judge may direct,
the assignee shall file in the office of the clerk an account of his
receipts, payments and charges touching the estate. The judge shall
appoint a time and place of hearing upon the question of the allowance
of such account and shall issue a citation or order of notice to the
debtor and creditors accordingly. At the hearing all parties in interest
may be heard, and the judge shall allow the account as shall seem
reasonable and just.

**Source.** 1861, 2488:5. GS 126:21. GL 140:21. 1885, 85:5. 1889, 100:1.
PS 201:29. PL 401:30. RL 465:30. 2011, 88:20, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 568:31

 **568:31 Priorities of Claims. –** The following claims are entitled
to priority, and shall be paid in full in the order named:
                                             
 I. Debts due the United States and all taxes.
                                             
 II. Wages due an operative, clerk or servant, not exceeding 
                                             $50,
for labor performed within 6 months prior to the beginning of the
insolvency proceedings.
                                             
 III. Taxable costs in any suit begun in good faith in which an
attachment is dissolved by the insolvency proceedings.

**Source.** 1885, 85:17. 1889, 100:2. PS 201:32. PL 401:31. RL 465:31.

### Section 568:32

 **568:32 Payment of Claims. –** At any time after the beginning of
the insolvency proceedings, upon such notice to the creditors and the
assignee as he shall think proper, the judge may order the payment in
whole or in part of claims entitled to priority under the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:7. GS 126:22. GL 140:22. PS 201:30. PL 401:32. RL
465:32.

### Section 568:33

 **568:33 Dividends. –** Within 8 months from the beginning of the
proceedings, the judge shall order that portion of the estate not
required to pay claims entitled to priority, or such part thereof as he
deems fit, to be divided among all the creditors whose claims have been
allowed and who are not entitled to priority, in proportion to their
respective claims. Further dividends shall be made as the occasion
requires.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:7. GS 126:22. GL 140:22. PS 201:31. PL 401:33. RL
465:33.

### Section 568:34

 **568:34 Appealed Claims. –** If an appeal in regard to any claim is
pending at the time of making a dividend, a sufficient amount shall be
reserved in the hands of the assignee to satisfy the dividends that may
be called for upon such claim.

**Source.** PS 201:33. PL 401:34. RL 465:34.

Oath of Debtor
--------------

### Section 568:35

 **568:35 Form. –** The debtor may amend his schedules at any time
within 3 months after the beginning of the proceedings. At the end of
such time, he shall subscribe, take and file in the office of the clerk
an oath, in substance as follows:
                                             
 I, .........., do solemnly swear that the account of my creditors
contained in the schedule made and signed by me and now on file in the
court is in all respects just and true according to my best knowledge
and belief. I do further swear that I have delivered to the messenger
all my estate, except such part as is by law exempt from attachment, and
such as has been necessarily spent for the support of myself and family,
and all my books of account and papers relating to my estate that were
within my possession or power when the same were demanded of me by the
messenger; that I have delivered to the messenger or assignee all such
of my said estate, books and papers as have since come to my possession;
and that if any other estate, effects or other things shall hereafter
come to my knowledge or possession, I will forthwith disclose or deliver
the same to the assignee. And I do further swear that I have not made
over or disposed of any part of my estate or effects for the future
benefit of myself or my family, or in order to defraud my creditors.

**Source.** 1885, 85:11. 1889, 96:4. PS 201:34. PL 401:35. RL 465:35.
2011, 88:20, eff. July 1, 2011.

Discharge of Debtor
-------------------

### Section 568:36

 **568:36 Procedure. –** At any time within 12 months after the
settlement of the final account of the assignee, and not afterward, the
debtor may petition the court for a discharge, and the judge shall
thereupon appoint a time and place for a hearing, of which the creditors
shall have due notice. A creditor opposing the discharge shall file a
specification in writing of the grounds of his opposition.

**Source.** 1885, 85:15. PS 201:35. 1895, 38:1. PL 401:36. RL 465:36.

### Section 568:37

 **568:37 Granting. –** If it appears to the satisfaction of the
judge, after the hearing provided for in RSA 568:36, that the debtor has
made a full disclosure and delivery of all his estate as herein
required, and that he has in all things conformed to the requirements of
the laws relating to insolvent debtors, the judge shall grant him a
discharge from all his debts not specially excepted, and shall give him
a certificate thereof under the seal of the court.

**Source.** 1885, 85:15. 1889, 100:2. PS 201:36. PL 401:37. RL 465:37.

### Section 568:38

 **568:38 Excepted Claims. –**
                                             
 I. Taxes and debts created by the debtor's fraud, embezzlement or
defalcation while acting as a public officer or in any fiduciary
capacity shall not be discharged.
                                             
 II. Loan repayments due from loans made in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 200-I to a medical or veterinary student shall not be
eligible to be discharged if less than 10 years have passed since the
first loan repayment was due.

**Source.** 1885, 85:15. 1889, 100:2. PS 201:37. PL 401:38. RL 465:38.
RSA 568:38. 1979, 302:3, 353:12, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 568:39

 **568:39 Joint Debtor. –** A discharge shall not release or
discharge a person liable for the same debt for or with the debtor.

**Source.** PS 201:38. PL 401:39. RL 465:39.

### Section 568:40

 **568:40 Consent of Creditors. –** A discharge shall not be granted
to a debtor whose assets do not pay 50 percent of the claims allowed
against his estate which are not entitled to priority, unless the assent
in writing of 2/3 in number and value of the creditors who have such
claims and whose claims have been allowed is filed in the case.

**Source.** 1885, 85:15. 1889, 100:2. PS 201:39. PL 401:40. RL 465:40.

### Section 568:41

 **568:41 Fraud. –** A discharge shall not be granted, nor if granted
be valid, if the debtor has wilfully sworn falsely as to any material
fact in the course of the proceedings or if he has fraudulently
concealed any part of his estate, or any books or writings relating
thereto; if, being insolvent and having sufficient cause to believe
himself so, the debtor has, within 6 months before the beginning of the
proceedings, obtained on credit any money, goods, chattels or other
thing of value with intent not to pay for the same, has destroyed,
altered, mutilated or falsified any of his books, documents, papers,
writings or securities or been privy thereto, or has made any fraudulent
payment, gift, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any part of his
property or spent any part thereof in gaming; if, having knowledge that
a person has proved a false debt against his estate, the debtor has not
disclosed the same to his assignee within one month after such
knowledge; or if the debtor has procured the assent of any creditor to
the discharge by pecuniary consideration.

**Source.** 1885, 85:12. 1889, 100:2. PS 201:40. PL 401:41. RL 465:41.

### Section 568:42

 **568:42 Refusal of Dividend. –** In case of a discharge, if a
creditor shall refuse to accept the dividends decreed to him in
discharge of his debt or claim, they shall be deposited with the judge
of probate, subject to the order of the creditor, and if the creditor
does not claim them within one year from the time of such deposit, the
judge shall pay them to the debtor.

**Source.** 1885, 85:14. PS 201:41. PL 401:42. RL 465:42.

Creditor's Petition
-------------------

### Section 568:43

 **568:43 Procedure. –** The judge of probate, upon petition, under
oath of any creditor or creditors of a debtor residing in the county,
setting forth that the debtor is owing the petitioner or petitioners

                                             $300 or more, that his property within the state, not exempt from
attachment, is in their belief insufficient to pay his debts, and that
they are not entitled to proceed under the Bankruptcy Act, shall appoint
a time and place of hearing and cause the petitioner to give notice
thereof to the debtor. If, after the hearing, the facts set forth in the
petition are found to be true, the judge shall adjudge the debtor
insolvent and issue his warrant to the sheriff of the county or one of
his deputies, directing him forthwith as messenger to take possession of
all the estate, real and personal, of the debtor not exempt from
attachment and to safely keep the same until further order of the court.
The judge may also order the debtor to return a list of his creditors
and a schedule of his property, each verified by his oath, within a
prescribed period of time.

**Source.** 1885, 85:7. PS 201:42. PL 401:43. RL 465:43.

### Section 568:44

 **568:44 Notice, etc. –** If the list of creditors provided for in
RSA 568:43 is returned, the judge shall cause notice to be given to the
creditors and proceed for the choice of an assignee, as directed by RSA
568:23. If for any reason the list shall not be returned, the judge
shall cause such notice of the petition as he deems sufficient to be
given, and afterward proceed as provided in RSA 568:23.

**Source.** 1885, 85:7. PS 201:43. PL 401:44. RL 465:44.

### Section 568:45

 **568:45 Effect. –** The estate of the debtor shall vest in the
judge of probate and such assignee and his successors as may be
appointed as in other cases, and the debtor may also be ordered to
execute an assignment, and further proceedings shall be had as in cases
of voluntary assignment.

**Source.** 1885, 85:7. PS 201:44. PL 401:45. RL 465:45.

Partnerships
------------

### Section 568:46

 **568:46 Partner's Petition. –** A partner, whenever his copartners
will not join with him in a voluntary assignment, may file a petition in
form and substance like a creditor's petition in the county where any of
the partners resides, praying that the firm be adjudged insolvent, and
all subsequent proceedings shall be the same as those in cases involving
creditors' petitions.

**Source.** 1885, 85:18. PS 201:45. PL 401:46. RL 465:46.

### Section 568:47

 **568:47 Effect; Procedure. –** The insolvency of a partnership
shall render each partner insolvent within the meaning of this chapter,
and his property not exempt from attachment, books and papers shall pass
to the messenger and assignee appointed in the partnership proceedings;
but the assignee shall be nominated by the partnership creditors. The
expenses of the proceedings shall be deducted from the whole amount
received by the assignee. The net proceeds of the partnership and
individual property shall be distributed among the creditors of the firm
and the creditors of the individual partners according to the rules of
equity in such cases.

**Source.** PS 201:46. PL 401:47. RL 465:47.

### Section 568:48

 **568:48 Discharge. –** The certificate of discharge shall be
granted or refused to each partner as though the proceedings had been
against him alone. In all other respects the proceedings against
partners shall be conducted as though against a single person.

**Source.** PS 201:47. PL 401:48. RL 465:48.

Corporations
------------

### Section 568:49

 **568:49 Procedure. –** Insolvent corporations created by the laws
of this state, except banking and railroad corporations, may make
assignments or be proceeded against in insolvency in the same manner as
individuals, and the judge for the county where the principal place of
business of the corporation is located may issue his warrant and proceed
as in other cases. The schedule of creditors and of the estate shall be
furnished by the treasurer or other financial officer of the
corporation, and all the provisions of this chapter which apply to the
debtor or set forth his duties in regard to executing papers, submitting
to examinations, disclosing, making over, secreting, concealing,
conveying, assigning, paying or conveying away his money or property
shall, in like manner and with like force and effect and penalties,
apply to each and every officer of the corporation and to the money and
property thereof.

**Source.** PS 201:48. PL 401:49. RL 465:49.

### Section 568:50

 **568:50 Officers' Oath. –** At the end of 3 months from the
beginning of the proceedings, the officers shall severally make and
subscribe an oath in substance as follows:
                                             
 I, .........., (president, etc., or treasurer, etc.), do swear that
I believe the account of the creditors of the corporation contained in
the schedules signed by .........., and now on file in court, is in all
respects just and true; that I do believe that all the property and
estate of said corporation, and all its books of account and papers,
have been delivered to the messenger or the assignee; and that, if any
goods or estate not so delivered hereafter come to my knowledge, I will
faithfully and diligently apprise the assignee thereof. And I do further
swear that, to the best of my knowledge, information and belief, there
is no part of the estate or effects of the corporation made over or
disposed of in any manner in fraud of the laws relating to insolvency or
of the creditors of the corporation.

**Source.** PS 201:49. PL 401:50. RL 465:50.

Penalty
-------

### Section 568:51

 **568:51 Penalty. –** If a debtor, or any officer of a corporation
against which a petition in insolvency is pending, shall wilfully omit
to file a list or schedule as ordered, or shall wilfully and
fraudulently give false information or neglect to give true information
to the assignee in relation to the estate or the claims of creditors, or
to do any act or to furnish or discover any evidence in his power or
knowledge material to the just settlement of the estate, he shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** GS 126:6. GL 140:6. 1885, 85:3. PS 201:50. PL 401:51. RL
465:51. RSA 568:51. 1973, 528:317, eff. at 11:59 P.M., Oct. 31, 1973.

Composition
-----------

### Section 568:52

 **568:52 Procedure. –** In all cases of insolvency where the
debtor's liability exceeds the sum of 
                                             $300, if the debtor shall, at the
first meeting of the creditors or at any subsequent time appointed by
the judge, of which legal notice has been given to the creditors,
produce an affidavit signed by him and sworn to before the judge of
probate of the following tenor, "I, .........., of .........., in the
county of .........., do solemnly swear that I have not removed,
concealed or secreted any money, papers, securities, effects or
property, real or personal, with the intent, purpose or expectation of
receiving, directly or indirectly, any benefit or advantage to myself,
and that I have not changed or falsified my books of account, deeds or
papers relating to my estate, and that I have not sold, pledged,
conveyed or transferred any of my property or estate in anticipation of
insolvency, or made any conveyance, mortgage, pledge, transfer or
payment to any creditor for the purpose of preferring any of my
creditors, and that I have not, directly or indirectly, given any
creditor or other person any compensation or promise of reward, except
reasonable counsel fees for service, and that my assets and liabilities
are correctly stated in the schedule filed in the probate office for the
county and signed by me''; and at the same time shall also produce an
agreement signed by 3/4 in number of his creditors holding 3/4 of all
his indebtedness, the debts of each of whom shall exceed 
                                             $50, in the
following form: "We, the undersigned, creditors of .........., of
.........., in the county of .........., do hereby agree to accept
.......... percent of our actual net claims against ..., the amounts of
which are correctly stated against our respective names, in full
discharge of the same; and we further declare that we have not received,
directly or indirectly, any compensation or promise of future payment
beyond the percent herein named''. If the judge shall be satisfied that
the agreement is signed by the required proportion of the creditors of
the debtor, and that the debtor has paid or secured the percentage named
in the agreement according to the terms thereof and all the expenses
incurred during the proceedings, he shall give the debtor, under the
hand and seal of the court, a full discharge of all his debts and
liabilities, not specially excepted, contracted prior to the beginning
of the proceedings; provided, that such a discharge shall not prevent
any creditor who may not have signed such agreement from proving his
claim at any time within 2 months from the beginning of the insolvency
proceedings, and having the same allowed at the agreed percentage.

**Source.** 1885, 85:11, 13. 1889, 96:4. PS 201:51. 1895, 88:1. PL
401:52. RL 465:52.

Appeals
-------

### Section 568:53

 **568:53 Time, etc. –** Appeals in cases of insolvency shall be
claimed within 30 days from the rendering of the decision and shall be
taken in the same manner and governed by the same rules of procedure as
in cases of other appeals from decrees of the judge of probate, except
as provided in RSA 568:54.

**Source.** 1862, 2594:12. GS 126:25. GL 140:25. 1885, 85:6. PS 201:52.
PL 401:53. RL 465:53.

### Section 568:54

 **568:54 Procedure. –** In case of appeal from the allowance or
disallowance of the claims of a creditor, the claimant, if appellant,
shall file in the office of the clerk, with his statement of reasons for
appeal, a declaration in proper form upon his claim; if appellee, he
shall file such declaration within 5 days after notice of the appeal.
The clerk shall thereupon file in the office of the clerk of the
superior court duly attested copies of the papers relating to the
appeal. The case shall be in order for trial at the first term of the
court, and the result shall be certified to the court of probate. The
proceedings there shall be altered to conform thereto.

**Source.** PS 201:53. PL 401:54. RL 465:54. 2011, 88:20, eff. July 1,
2011.

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 568:55

 **568:55 Death of Debtor. –** If the debtor dies after the issuance
of the warrant and while the proceedings are pending, the proceedings
shall be continued and conducted in like manner and with like validity
and effect as if he had lived.

**Source.** PS 201:54. PL 401:55. RL 465:55.

### Section 568:56

 **568:56 Beginning of Proceedings. –** The date of the filing of the
debtor's assignment or of the filing of the creditor's petition shall be
deemed to be the beginning of proceedings in insolvency under the
provisions of this chapter in each case and the time from which other
times and dates shall be reckoned.

**Source.** PS 201:55. PL 401:56. RL 465:56.

### Section 568:57

 **568:57 Notices. –** In all proceedings under this chapter, where
notice, either personal or by publication, is required, it shall be for
such length of time as the court may order.

**Source.** 1895, 39:1. PL 401:57. RL 465:57.
