---
title: 'CHAPTER 292-B UNIFORM PRUDENT MANAGEMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL FUNDS ACT'
---

TITLE XXVII
                                             
CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROPRIETORS OF COMMON LANDS
===========================================================

CHAPTER 292-B
                                             
UNIFORM PRUDENT MANAGEMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL FUNDS ACT
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 292-B:1

 **292-B:1 Short Title. –** This act may be cited as the Uniform
Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:2

 **292-B:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Charitable purpose'' means the relief of poverty, the
advancement of education or religion, the promotion of health, the
promotion of a governmental purpose, or any other purpose the
achievement of which is beneficial to the community.
                                             
 II. "Endowment fund'' means an institutional fund or part thereof
that, under the terms of a gift instrument, is not wholly expendable by
the institution on a current basis. The term does not include assets
that an institution designates as an endowment fund for its own use.
                                             
 III. "Gift instrument'' means a record or records, including an
institutional solicitation, under which property is granted to,
transferred to, or held by an institution as an institutional fund.
                                             
 IV. "Institution'' means:
                                             
 (a) A person, other than an individual, organized and operated
exclusively for charitable purposes;
                                             
 (b) A government or governmental subdivision, agency, or
instrumentality, to the extent that it holds funds exclusively for a
charitable purpose; or
                                             
 (c) A trust that had both charitable and noncharitable interests,
after all noncharitable interests have terminated.
                                             
 V. "Institutional fund'' means a fund held by an institution
exclusively for charitable purposes. The term does not include:
                                             
 (a) Program-related assets;
                                             
 (b) A fund held for an institution by a trustee that is not an
institution;
                                             
 (c) A fund in which a beneficiary that is not an institution has
an interest, other than an interest that could arise upon violation or
failure of the purposes of the fund; or
                                             
 (d) A fund held by a town or other municipality under RSA 31:19,
RSA 202-A:23, or a fund created by a town or other municipality under
RSA 31:19-a.
                                             
 VI. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association,
joint venture, public corporation, government or governmental
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, or any other legal or
commercial entity.
                                             
 VII. "Program-related asset'' means an asset held by an institution
primarily to accomplish a charitable purpose of the institution and not
primarily for investment.
                                             
 VIII. "Record'' means information that is inscribed on a tangible
medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is
retrievable in perceivable form.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:3

 **292-B:3 Standard of Conduct in Managing and Investing
Institutional Fund. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the intent of a donor expressed in a gift instrument,
an institution, in managing and investing an institutional fund, shall
consider the charitable purposes of the institution and the purposes of
the institutional fund.
                                             
 II. In addition to complying with the duty of loyalty imposed by law
other than this chapter, each person responsible for managing and
investing an institutional fund shall manage and invest the fund in good
faith and with the care an ordinarily prudent person in a like position
would exercise under similar circumstances.
                                             
 III. In managing and investing an institutional fund, an
institution:
                                             
 (a) May incur only costs that are appropriate and reasonable in
relation to the assets, the purposes of the institution; and the skills
available to the institution; and
                                             
 (b) Shall make a reasonable effort to verify facts relevant to
the management and investment of the fund.
                                             
 IV. An institution may pool 2 or more institutional funds for
purposes of management and investment.
                                             
 V. Except as otherwise provided by a gift instrument, the following
rules apply:
                                             
 (a) In managing and investing an institutional fund, the
following factors, if relevant, shall be considered:
                                             
 (1) General economic conditions;
                                             
 (2) The possible effect of inflation or deflation;
                                             
 (3) The expected tax consequences, if any, of investment
decisions or strategies;
                                             
 (4) The role that each investment or course of action plays
within the overall investment portfolio of the fund;
                                             
 (5) The expected total return from income and the appreciation
of investments;
                                             
 (6) Other resources of the institution;
                                             
 (7) The needs of the institution and the fund to make
distributions and to preserve capital; and
                                             
 (8) An asset's special relationship or special value, if any,
to the charitable purposes of the institution.
                                             
 (b) Management and investment decisions about an individual asset
must be made not in isolation but rather in the context of the
institutional fund's portfolio of investments as a whole and as a part
of an overall investment strategy having risk and return objectives
reasonably suited to the fund and to the institution.
                                             
 (c) Except as otherwise provided by law other than this chapter,
an institution may invest in any kind of property or type of investment
consistent with this section.
                                             
 (d) An institution shall diversify the investments of an
institutional fund unless the institution reasonably determines that,
because of special circumstances, the purposes of the fund are better
served without diversification.
                                             
 (e) Within a reasonable time after receiving property, an
institution shall make and carry out decisions concerning the retention
or disposition of the property or to rebalance a portfolio, in order to
bring the institutional fund into compliance with the purposes, terms,
and distribution requirements of the institution as necessary to meet
other circumstances of the institution and the requirements of this
chapter.
                                             
 (f) A person that has special skills or expertise, or is selected
in reliance upon the person's representation that the person has special
skills or expertise, has a duty to use those skills or that expertise in
managing and investing institutional funds.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:4

 **292-B:4 Appropriation for Expenditure or Accumulation of Endowment
Fund; Rules of Construction. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the intent of a donor expressed in the gift instrument
and to paragraphs IV and V, an institution may appropriate for
expenditure or accumulate so much of an endowment fund as the
institution determines is prudent for the uses, benefits, purposes, and
duration for which the endowment fund is established. Unless stated
otherwise in the gift instrument, the assets in an endowment fund are
donor-restricted assets until appropriated for expenditure by the
institution. In making a determination to appropriate or accumulate, the
institution shall act in good faith, with the care that an ordinarily
prudent person in a like position would exercise under similar
circumstances, and shall consider the following factors:
                                             
 (a) The duration and preservation of the endowment fund;
                                             
 (b) The purposes of the institution and the endowment fund;
                                             
 (c) General economic conditions;
                                             
 (d) The possible effect of inflation or deflation;
                                             
 (e) The expected total return from income and the appreciation of
investments;
                                             
 (f) Other resources of the institution; and
                                             
 (g) The investment policy of the institution.
                                             
 II. To limit the authority to appropriate for expenditure or
accumulate under paragraph I, a gift instrument must specifically state
the limitation.
                                             
 III. Terms in a gift instrument designating a gift as an endowment,
or a direction or authorization in the gift instrument to use only
"income,'' "interest,'' "dividends,'' or "rents, issues, or profits,''
or "to preserve the principal intact,'' or words of similar import:
                                             
 (a) Create an endowment fund of permanent duration unless other
language in the gift instrument limits the duration or purpose of the
fund; and
                                             
 (b) Do not otherwise limit the authority to appropriate for
expenditure or accumulate under paragraph I.
                                             
 IV. Any institution administering an endowment fund with a market
value of 
                                             $2,000,000 or more in the aggregate shall notify the attorney
general upon its adoption of the provisions of RSA 292-B.
                                             
 V. (a) If an institution has endowment funds with an aggregate value
of less than 
                                             $2,000,000, the institution shall notify the attorney
general at least 60 days prior to an appropriation for expenditure of an
amount that would cause the value of the institution's endowment funds
to fall below the aggregate historic dollar value of the institution's
endowment funds. During the 60-day period the attorney general may
require the institution to obtain court approval for the proposed
expenditure.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this paragraph, "historic dollar value''
means the aggregate value in dollars of:
                                             
 (1) Each endowment fund at the time it became an endowment
fund;
                                             
 (2) Each subsequent donation to the fund at the time the
donation is made; and
                                             
 (3) Each accumulation made pursuant to a direction in the
applicable gift instrument at the time the accumulation is added to the
fund.
                                             
 (c) The institution's determination of historic dollar value made
in good faith is conclusive.
                                             
 VI. The appropriation for expenditure in any year of any amount
greater than 7 percent of the fair market value of an endowment fund,
calculated on the basis of fair market value determined at least
quarterly and averaged over a period of not less than 3 years
immediately preceding the year in which the appropriation for
expenditure was made, creates a rebuttable presumption of imprudence.
For an endowment fund in existence for fewer than 3 years, the fair
market value of the endowment fund shall be calculated for the period of
time the endowment fund has been in existence.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:5

 **292-B:5 Delegation of Management and Investment Functions. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to any specific limitation set forth in a gift instrument
or in law other than this chapter, an institution may delegate to an
external agent the management and investment of an institutional fund to
the extent that an institution could prudently delegate under the
circumstances. An institution shall act in good faith, with the care
that an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would exercise
under similar circumstances, in:
                                             
 (a) Selecting an agent;
                                             
 (b) Establishing the scope and terms of the delegation,
consistent with the purposes of the institution and the institutional
fund; and
                                             
 (c) Periodically reviewing the agent's actions in order to
monitor the agent's performance and compliance with the scope and terms
of the delegation.
                                             
 II. In performing a delegated function, an agent owes a duty to the
institution to exercise reasonable care to comply with the scope and
terms of the delegation.
                                             
 III. An institution that complies with paragraph I is not liable for
the decisions or actions of an agent to which the function was
delegated.
                                             
 IV. By accepting delegation of a management or investment function
from an institution that is subject to the laws of this state, an agent
submits to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state in all
proceedings arising from or related to the delegation or the performance
of the delegated function.
                                             
 V. An institution may delegate management and investment functions
to its committees, officers, or employees as authorized by law of this
state other than this chapter.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:6

 **292-B:6 Release or Modification of Restrictions on Management,
Investment, or Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. If the donor consents in a record, an institution may release or
modify, in whole or in part, a restriction contained in a gift
instrument on the management, investment, or purpose of an institutional
fund. A release or modification may not allow a fund to be used for a
purpose other than a charitable purpose of the institution.
                                             
 II. The court, upon application of an institution, may modify a
restriction contained in a gift instrument regarding the management or
investment of an institutional fund if the restriction has become
impracticable or wasteful, if it impairs the management or investment of
the fund, or if, because of circumstances not anticipated by the donor,
a modification of a restriction will further the purposes of the fund.
The institution shall notify the attorney general of the application,
and the attorney general must be given an opportunity to be heard. To
the extent practicable, any modification must be made in accordance with
the donor's probable intention.
                                             
 III. If a particular charitable purpose or a restriction contained
in a gift instrument on the use of an institutional fund becomes
unlawful, impracticable, impossible to achieve, or wasteful, the court,
upon application of an institution, may modify the purpose of the fund
or the restriction on the use of the fund in a manner consistent with
the charitable purposes expressed in the gift instrument. The
institution shall notify the attorney general of the application, and
the attorney general must be given an opportunity to be heard.
                                             
 IV. If an institution determines that a restriction contained in a
gift instrument on the management, investment, or purpose of an
institutional fund is unlawful, impracticable, impossible to achieve, or
wasteful, the institution, 60 days after notification to the attorney
general, may release or modify the restriction, in whole or part, if:
                                             
 (a) The institutional fund subject to the restriction has a total
value of less than 
                                             $25,000;
                                             
 (b) More than 25 years have elapsed since the fund was
established; and
                                             
 (c) The institution uses the property in a manner consistent with
the charitable purposes expressed in the gift instrument.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:7

 **292-B:7 Reviewing Compliance. –** Compliance with this chapter is
determined in light of the facts and circumstances existing at the time
a decision is made or action is taken, and not by hindsight.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:8

 **292-B:8 Application to Existing Institutional Funds. –** This
chapter applies to institutional funds existing on or established after
July 1, 2008. As applied to institutional funds existing on July 1,
2008, this chapter governs only decisions made or actions taken on or
after that date.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:9

 **292-B:9 Relation to Electronic Signatures in Global and National
Commerce Act. –** This chapter modifies, limits, and supersedes the
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, 15 U.S.C.
section 7001 et seq., but does not modify, limit, or supersede section
101 of that act, 15 U.S.C. section 7001(a), or authorize electronic
delivery of any of the notices described in section 103 of that act, 15
U.S.C. section 7003(b).

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 292-B:10

 **292-B:10 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** In
applying and construing this uniform act, consideration must be given to
the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject
matter among states that enact it.

**Source.** 2008, 75:1, eff. July 1, 2008.
