---
title: CHAPTER 292 VOLUNTARY CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS
---

TITLE XXVII
                                             
CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROPRIETORS OF COMMON LANDS
===========================================================

CHAPTER 292
                                             
VOLUNTARY CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS
---------------------------------------

Formation of Corporation
------------------------

### Section 292:1

 **292:1 Incorporators; Purposes. –** Five or more persons of lawful
age may associate together by articles of agreement to form a
corporation, for any of the following purposes:
                                             
 I. The promotion of the cause of temperance and of any charitable or
religious cause.
                                             
 II. The establishment and maintenance of literary and scientific
institutions, libraries, lyceums and musical, agricultural, literary, or
scientific associations, the promotion of education and the arts and
sciences by any other means and for mental improvement.
                                             
 III. The establishment and maintenance of hospitals, homes for the
aged and for invalids, and other charitable institutions.
                                             
 IV. The provision of suitable grounds and other conveniences for the
burial of the dead.
                                             
 V. The organization and maintenance of lodges of Free Masons, Odd
Fellows, and other similar societies, and for social recreation and
improvement.
                                             
 VI. The provision and care of walks, parks, recreational and
athletic facilities, commons, roads and streets.
                                             
 VII. The planting, cultivation, and protection of shade, ornamental,
and forest trees.
                                             
 VIII. The promotion of agriculture.
                                             
 IX. The promotion of the growth and prosperity of cities, towns, and
villages, including provision for recreational and athletic facilities
for public use.
                                             
 X. The promotion of law and order and the better enforcement of
existing laws, or to prevent cruelty to animals.
                                             
 XI. The protection or propagation of fish and game, and for any
other purpose not prohibited by law.
                                             
 XII. To provide industrial, commercial, manufacturing and warehouse
facilities for the purpose of developing the growth and prosperity of
the state, counties, cities, towns and villages.
                                             
 XIII. To serve and promote the recreational and athletic interests
of the state of New Hampshire or any town or individual group thereof.
                                             
 XIV. The provision of mental health services.
                                             
 XV. Any other purpose for which an organization may be exempt from
federal taxation under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
and any amendments thereto.

**Source.** RS 145:1. 1846, 325:1. CS 152:1. 1866, 4224:1. GS 137:1;
138:1. 1872, 6:1. GL 151:1; 152:1. PS 147:1. 1895, 1:1. PL 223:1. RL
272:1. RSA 292:1. 1965, 74:1. 1967, 102:1; 359:2. 1969, 43:1. 1977,
407:1. 1991, 261:1-3, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 292:1-a

 **292:1-a Legal Services. –** Five or more persons of lawful age may
associate together by articles of agreement to form a corporation,
without a capital stock, for the purpose of providing professional legal
services to the poor; provided, however, that no such corporation shall
commence business until its articles of agreement and by-laws, and such
other information as may be required, have been submitted to the supreme
court for approval and such court has authorized it to commence business
upon finding that it is a responsible organization. Such authorization
may, after hearing, be revoked or suspended by the court for just cause.
The actual practice of law by such corporation shall be conducted solely
by members of the New Hampshire bar in good standing, and the fact of
incorporation shall not in any way be deemed to immunize any attorney
employed by the corporation from personal responsibility and liability
to the clients whom he serves. The provisions of RSA 311:11 shall not
apply to corporations organized under this section.

**Source.** 1967, 239:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1967.

### Section 292:2

 **292:2 Articles of Agreement. –** The articles of agreement shall
contain the following:
                                             
 I. The name of the corporation.
                                             
 II. The object for which the corporation is established.
                                             
 II-a. The provisions for establishing criteria and procedures for
membership and participation in the corporation.
                                             
 III. The provisions for disposition of the corporate assets in the
event of dissolution of the corporation, including the prioritization of
rights of shareholders and members to corporate assets.
                                             
 IV. The address at which the business of the corporation is to be
carried on.
                                             
 V. The amount of capital stock, if any, or the number of shares or
membership certificates, if any, and provisions for retirement,
reacquisition and redemption of those shares or certificates.
                                             
 V-a. (a) The articles of agreement may contain a provision
eliminating or limiting the personal liability of a director, an
officer, or both, to the corporation or its shareholders for monetary
damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a director, an officer, or both,
except with respect to:
                                             
 (1) Any breach of the director's or officer's duty of loyalty
to the corporation or its shareholders.
                                             
 (2) Acts or omissions which are not in good faith or which
involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law.
                                             
 (3) Any transaction from which the director, officer, or both,
derived an improper personal benefit.
                                             
 (b) This paragraph shall not be construed to eliminate or limit
the liability of a director, an officer, or both, for any act or
omission occurring before January 1, 1992.
                                             
 VI. The signature and post office address of each of the persons
associating together to form the corporation.

**Source.** RS 145:2. CS 152:2. 1866, 4224:2. GS 137:2; 138:2. GL 151:2;
152:2. PS 147:2. PL 223:2. RL 272:2. RSA 292:2. 1971, 73:1. 1991, 261:4.
2010, 105:1, eff. July 25, 2010.

### Section 292:2-a

 **292:2-a Charitable Corporations; Required Provisions. –** Every
charitable corporation established under this chapter which is a private
foundation as defined in section 509(a) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code of 1954, and which is in existence on the effective date of
this section, or which is thereafter established, is subject to the
following provisions, whether they are set forth in the articles of
agreement or not:
                                             
 I. A corporation which is a "private foundation'' as defined in
section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, shall not:
                                             
 (a) Engage in any act of "self-dealing'' (as defined in section
4941(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954), which would give rise to
any liability for the tax imposed by section 4941(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954;
                                             
 (b) Retain any "excess business holdings'' (as defined in section
4943(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954), which would give rise to
any liability for the tax imposed by section 4943(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; nor
                                             
 (c) Make any investment which would jeopardize the carrying out
of any of its exempt purposes, within the meaning of section 4944 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, so as to give rise to any liability for
the tax imposed by section 4944(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954;
nor
                                             
 (d) Make any "taxable expenditures'' (as defined in section
4945(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954) which would give rise to
any liability for the tax imposed by section 4945(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954.
                                             
 II. Each corporation which is a "private foundation'' as defined in
section 509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 shall distribute, for
the purposes specified in its articles of organization, for each taxable
year, amounts at least sufficient to avoid liability for the tax imposed
by section 4942(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
                                             
 III. The provisions of paragraphs I and II shall apply to any
corporation except to the extent that a court of competent jurisdiction
determines that to apply these provisions would be contrary to the terms
of the articles of agreement or other instrument governing the
corporation or the administration of charitable funds held by it, and
that the articles or the other instrument cannot properly be changed to
conform to these provisions.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section impairs the rights and powers of the
courts or of the attorney general with respect to any corporation.
                                             
 V. All references to sections of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
include amendments to those sections which are made after the effective
date of this section, and include all corresponding provisions of any
United States Internal Revenue laws which replace the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954.

**Source.** 1971, 378:1, eff. Aug. 27, 1971; 584:3, 4, eff. Sept. 29,
1971.

### Section 292:3

 **292:3 Name. –**
                                             
 I. A corporate name shall not contain language stating or implying
that the corporation is organized for a purpose other than that
permitted by RSA 292:1 and its articles of agreement.
                                             
 II. Except as authorized by paragraphs III and IV, a corporation
name, based upon the records of the secretary of state, shall be
distinguishable from, and not the same as:
                                             
 (a) The name of an entity incorporated, authorized, formed, or
registered to do business in this state under RSA 292, RSA 293-A, RSA
293-B, RSA 294-A, RSA 301, RSA 301-A, RSA 304-A, RSA 304-B, RSA 304-C,
RSA 305-A, or RSA 349.
                                             
 (b) A name reserved under RSA 293-A, RSA 293-B, RSA 304-A, RSA
304-B, RSA 304-C.
                                             
 (c) The fictitious name of another foreign corporation authorized
to transact business in this state.
                                             
 (d) The name of an agency or instrumentality of the United States
or this state or a subdivision thereof.
                                             
 (e) The name of any political party recognized under RSA 652:11,
unless written consent is obtained from the authorized representative of
the political organization.
                                             
 (f) The name "farmers' market'' unless the entity meets the
definition of "farmers' market'' established in RSA 21:34-a, V.
                                             
 III. A corporation may apply to the secretary of state for
authorization to use a name that is not distinguishable from, or is the
same as, one or more of the names described in paragraph II, as
determined from review of the records of the secretary of state. The
secretary of state shall authorize use of the name applied for if:
                                             
 (a) The holder or holders of the name as described in paragraph
II gives written consent to use the name that is not distinguishable
from the name of the applying corporation; or if the name is the same,
one or more words are added to the name to make the new name
distinguishable from the other name; or
                                             
 (b) The other entity consents to the use in writing and submits
an undertaking in a form satisfactory to the secretary of state to
change its name to a name that is distinguishable from, and not the same
as, the name of the applying corporation; or
                                             
 (c) The applicant delivers to the secretary of state a certified
copy of the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction
establishing the applicant's right to use the name applied for in this
state.
                                             
 IV. A corporation may use the name, including the fictitious name,
of another domestic or foreign entity that is used in this state if the
other entity is incorporated, authorized, formed, or registered to
transact business in this state and the proposed user corporation:
                                             
 (a) Has merged with the other entity;
                                             
 (b) Has been formed by reorganization of the other entity; or
                                             
 (c) Has acquired all or substantially all of the assets,
including the name, of the other entity.
                                             
 V. This chapter does not control the use of fictitious names.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner or owners of a
trade name registered under RSA 349 to form a domestic corporation under
the same name as the trade name.

**Source.** PS 147:3. PL 223:3. RL 272:3. RSA 292:3. 1988, 93:4. 1991,
67:2. 1999, 293:1. 2004, 248:1. 2009, 293:1. 2015, 188:1, 2, eff. Jan.
1, 2016.

### Section 292:4

 **292:4 Record of Articles of Agreement; Effect. –** The articles of
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the secretary of state.
When so recorded, the signers thereof shall be a corporation, and such
corporation, its officers, and members shall have all the rights and
powers and be subject to all the duties and liabilities of other similar
corporations incorporated under this chapter, their officers, and
members, except so far as they are limited or enlarged by this chapter.
Subsequent to filing with the secretary of state a copy shall be filed
in the office of the clerk of the town in which the mailing address of
the corporation is located.

**Source.** 1866, 4224:1. GS 138:1. GL 152:1. PS 147:4. PL 223:4. RL
272:4. RSA 292:4. 1991, 261:5. 2004, 248:2, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 292:5

 **292:5 Fees for Recording. –** The fee for recording the articles
of agreement in the office of the secretary of state as required in RSA
292:4 shall be 
                                             $25. The fee for recording any record of amendment in
the office of the secretary of state as required in RSA 292:7 shall be

                                             $25. The fee for recording the articles of agreement or amendments to
such articles in the office of the town or city clerk as required in RSA
292:4 and RSA 292:7 shall be 
                                             $5.

**Source.** 1949, 265:1. RSA 292:5. 1955, 171:7. 1989, 408:64. 1991,
252:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

### Section 292:5-a

 **292:5-a Returns, Filing Fee, Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1957, 32:1,
eff. Mar. 16, 1957.
                                             ]

### Section 292:5-b

 **292:5-b Foreign Nonprofit Corporations; Registration, Fees. –** A
foreign nonprofit corporation established for any of the purposes set
forth in RSA 292:1 or for a substantially similar purpose, desiring to
do business in this state in furtherance of such purpose for the benefit
of citizens of this state, may register as a foreign corporation by
making application as provided in RSA 293-A:15.03, excepting those
portions relative to using a form of the words "corporation,''
"company,'' "incorporated'' or "limited'' in the corporate name. Any
such foreign nonprofit corporation shall file the return and pay the fee
provided in RSA 292:25-29.

**Source.** 1977, 461:2. 1979, 92:1. 1985, 339:1. 1989, 256:2. 1992,
255:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 292:6

 **292:6 Bylaws; Organization. –** The initial bylaws of a
corporation shall be adopted by a 2/3 majority action of the signers of
the articles of agreement. The power to alter, amend or repeal the
bylaws or to adopt new bylaws, subject to repeal or change by a 2/3
majority action of the shareholders or holders of membership
certificates, shall be vested in the board of directors unless reserved
to the shareholders or holders of membership certificates by the
articles of agreement. The bylaws may contain any provisions for the
regulation and management of the affairs of the corporation not
inconsistent with the laws of the state or the articles of agreement,
including provisions for issuance and reacquisition of membership
certificates.

**Source.** PS 147:5. PL 223:5. RL 272:5. RSA 292:6. 1991, 261:6, eff.
Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 292:6-a

 **292:6-a Board of Directors of Charitable Nonprofit Corporations.
–** In the interest of encouraging diversity of discussion, connection
with the public, and public confidence, the board of directors of a
charitable nonprofit corporation shall have at least 5 voting members,
who are not of the same immediate family or related by blood or
marriage. No employee of a charitable nonprofit corporation shall hold
the position of chairperson or presiding officer of the board. This
section shall not apply to those nonprofit corporations in existence on
August 10, 1996, until one year after August 10, 1996, nor to any
organization qualified as a private foundation under the applicable
provisions of the United States Internal Revenue Code, nor to religious
organizations, churches, or the integrated auxiliaries thereof or to
conventions or associations of churches. The provisions of this section
may be waived with the approval of the director of charitable trusts
after application for such waiver.

**Source.** 1996, 302:3. 1997, 184:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 292:6-b

 **292:6-b Voting. –**
                                             
 I. A voluntary corporation may have one or more classes of members
or may have no members. In the absence of a provision in its articles or
bylaws providing for members, a voluntary corporation has no members.
                                             
 II. If a voluntary corporation has no members, an action for which
there is no specific provision of this chapter applicable to a voluntary
corporation without members and that would otherwise require approval of
the members requires only the approval of the board of directors.
                                             
 III. Members are of one class unless the articles establish, or
authorize the bylaws to establish, more than one class. Members shall
have no voting rights, except as specifically provided in the articles
or bylaws. The articles or bylaws may fix the term of membership.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any provision of the articles or bylaws to the
contrary, each individual board member and each member of a voluntary
corporation entitled to vote shall be entitled to no more than one vote.

**Source.** 2010, 105:2, eff. July 25, 2010.

Powers of Corporations
----------------------

### Section 292:7

 **292:7 Change of Name; Amending Articles. –** Any corporation now
or hereafter organized or registered in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, and any existing corporation which may have been so
organized or registered, may change its name, increase or decrease its
capital stock or membership certificates, merge with or acquire any
other corporation formed pursuant to this chapter, or amend its articles
of agreement, by a majority vote of such corporation's board of
directors or trustees, at a meeting duly called for that purpose, and by
recording a certified copy of such vote in the office of the secretary
of state and in the office of the clerk of the town or city in this
state which is its principal place of business. In the case of a foreign
nonprofit corporation registered in New Hampshire, a copy of the
amendment or plan of merger, certified by the proper officer of the
state of incorporation, shall be filed with the secretary of state,
together with the fee provided in RSA 292:5. The surviving corporation
in a merger shall continue to have all the authority and powers vested
in the merging corporations, including any powers previously conferred
upon them by the legislature.

**Source.** 1895, 1:2. 1897, 49:1. PL 223:6. 1931, 69:1. RL 272:6. RSA
292:7. 1971, 73:2. 1983, 112:11. 1988, 93:5. 1991, 261:7, eff. Jan. 1,
1992.

### Section 292:8

 **292:8 Capital Structure. –** The corporation may generate funds
through its members, including, but not limited to:
                                             
 I. Issuance of membership certificates or stock certificates, or
both, in the corporation.
                                             
 II. Receipt of contributions to capital.
                                             
 III. Assessment of dues and fees on members.

**Source.** RS 145:9. CS 152:9. GS 137:7. GL 151:7. PS 147:9. PL 223:8.
RL 272:7. RSA 292:8. 1971, 73:3. 1991, 261:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

Failure to Make Returns
-----------------------

### Section 292:8-a

 **292:8-a Disposition of Records by Secretary of State. –**

                                             [Repealed 1975, 95:2, eff. June 21, 1975.
                                             ]

Higher Education Corporations
-----------------------------

### Section 292:8-b

 **292:8-b Terms Defined. –** The following words as used in this
subdivision shall be construed as follows:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the higher education commission established
in RSA 21-N:8-a.
                                             
 II. "Higher learning'' means studies which are more advanced or
difficult than those prevalently offered in a secondary school and which
are creditable toward an academic or professional degree.
                                             
 III. "Degree'' means the formal recognition of a stage of progress
in the pursuit of higher learning, including the associate, bachelor's,
master's, doctorate, professional, or other award, diploma or the
equivalent under any other designation.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1973, 533:4. 2011, 224:143, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 292:8-c

 **292:8-c Organization. –** The articles of agreement for the
purpose of organizing a corporation for the establishment of an
institution of higher learning shall be submitted to the commission for
its consent for said incorporation.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1973, 533:5. 1977, 407:2. 2011, 224:144. 2013,
164:3, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-d

 **292:8-d Approval. –** No articles of agreement for the
incorporation of institutions of higher learning shall be recorded in
the office of the secretary of state unless or until consent for said
incorporation has been obtained from the commission.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1973, 533:6. 1977, 407:3. 2013, 164:3, eff. June
28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-e

 **292:8-e General Statement. –** The commission shall approve as a
corporation of higher learning only such institutions as have been
evaluated according to procedures and standards established by the
commission. The commission may accept accreditation or program approval
by a recognized accrediting body in place of its own independent
evaluation.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1973, 533:7. 2013, 164:3, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-ee

 **292:8-ee Freedom From Liability. –** No employee of the division,
member of the commission, or any member of an evaluation committee
established under any provision of this subdivision shall be held
personally liable, either as an individual or as a member of a group, so
long as said employee or member was acting in good faith in the
furtherance of duties as an employee of the division or member of the
commission or an evaluation committee. All such members shall be
entitled to the protections afforded by RSA 99-D.

**Source.** 1983, 141:1. 2011, 224:146. 2013, 164:3, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-f

 **292:8-f Submission of Plans. –** Any person or entity desiring to
establish an institution of higher learning shall submit to the
commission its plans, which shall be evaluated by the commission. Such
evaluation shall include among other things the adequacy of the
buildings or proposed buildings, instructional facilities and provisions
for safety and well-being of its students, the qualifications of the
faculty, the character of the program of studies and the adequacy of
financial resources. All fees collected by the commission under this
section shall be deposited into the higher education fund established in
RSA 21-N:8-a, III.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1967, 288:2. 1973, 533:8. 2013, 164:3, eff. June
28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-ff

 **292:8-ff Continuing Review. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall conduct periodic reevaluations of
educational institutions incorporated under this chapter.
                                             
 II. The commission shall conduct a special reevaluation of any
educational institution, if:
                                             
 (a) The institution is sold or transferred to, or merged with,
another entity; or
                                             
 (b) There is a substantial change in the governance of the
institution.
                                             
 III. The commission shall suspend or revoke the approval or degree
granting authority of any institution which no longer meets the
standards established by rule under RSA 21-N:8-a, II(e).
                                             
 IV. Any institution which has not conducted regular instruction for
3 consecutive years and whose charter has not been repealed shall,
before announcing a resumption of instruction, submit plans to the
commission and be evaluated and approved under RSA 292:8-f.
                                             
 V. Any institution which has not awarded a particular degree for 4
years shall seek and receive approval by the commission before resuming
the awarding of that degree.

**Source.** 1969, 4:2. 1973, 533:9. 1981, 574:4. 2011, 224:147. 2013,
164:3, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-g

 **292:8-g Limitation on Name. –** Notwithstanding the provisions of
RSA 292:3 no person, school, association or corporation shall use in any
way the term "junior college'' or "college'' or "university'' in
connection with an institution, or use any other name, title or
descriptive matter tending to designate that it is an institution of
higher learning unless it has been incorporated under the provisions of
this chapter. Any person, school, association or corporation authorized
by a special act of the legislature shall not change its name to include
any of said terms under the provisions of RSA 292:8-l unless its
amendment therefor shall be submitted to and approved by the commission
prior to being filed in the office of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1967, 92:2. 1973, 533:10. 2013, 164:3, eff. June
28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-h

 **292:8-h Granting of Degrees. –**
                                             
 I. This section shall apply to all educational institutions within
the state granting degrees or seeking to do so, except the following:
                                             
 (a) Any institution now granting degrees which has been in
continuous operation since before 1775;
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (c) Institutions of the university system of New Hampshire
pursuant to RSA 187-A and institutions of the community college system
of New Hampshire pursuant to RSA 188-F.
                                             
 II. No educational institution shall grant degrees unless authorized
by name to do so by an act of the legislature.
                                             
 III. The commission shall specify the degrees an institution may
grant, and the commission may renew, for a set term of years, degree
granting authority. The commission shall report its activity by January
31 of each odd-numbered year to both the house and senate standing
committees on education.
                                             
 IV. Any out-of-state institution of higher learning planning to
establish a branch campus or offer courses, programs, or degrees in this
state, shall apply to the commission for evaluation and approval of its
plans. If such plans are not approved or if approval is withdrawn by the
commission, all operations and publicity of the out-of-state institution
shall cease without delay.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1971, 540:3. 1973, 533:11. 1981, 574:1. 1983,
239:10. 2011, 224:145. 2013, 164:3, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 292:8-i

 **292:8-i Penalty. –** Any person who shall violate the provisions
of RSA 292:8-g or 292:8-h shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1973, 529:61, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 292:8-j

 **292:8-j Injunctive Relief. –** In addition to the penalty provided
by RSA 292:8-i, the commission may institute in any court of competent
jurisdiction, an action to prevent or restrain any violation of the
provisions of RSA 292:8-g or 8-h and the court shall adjudge to the
plaintiff such relief by way of injunction (which may be mandatory) or
otherwise as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the
case, in order to fully effectuate the purpose of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1965, 44:1. 1973, 533:12, eff. July 1, 1973.

### Section 292:8-k

 **292:8-k Exemption. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 533:15, eff. July 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 292:8-kk

 **292:8-kk Reports Required. –**
                                             
 I. When any institution of higher learning ceases the regular
conduct of instruction, 2 certified transcripts and an electronic copy
of the same for each student who was registered for instruction at the
institution shall be forwarded to the commission together with a course
catalogue for each year in which the institution operated, and an
explanation of the institution's credit and grading system. The
commission shall preserve these records and upon request of the
individual concerned, shall furnish a certified copy of the individual's
record. The fee for each record so furnished to be paid to the
commission shall be sufficient to cover related costs.
                                             
 II. All transcript request fees collected by the commission under
this section shall be deposited into the higher education fund
established in RSA 21-N:8-a, III and shall be used for managing the
storage and retrieval of closed school transcripts.

**Source.** 1969, 4:1. 1973, 533:13. 1979, 87:1. 2003, 235:4. 2004,
105:1. 2008, 338:9. 2011, 224:148. 2013, 164:5. 2014, 132:2, eff. June
16, 2014.

Special Corporations
--------------------

### Section 292:8-l

 **292:8-l Powers Extended. –** Any non-profit corporation heretofore
organized by special act of the legislature for purposes as set forth by
RSA 292:1 may:
                                             
 I. Change its name, eliminate any limitation on the assets it is
authorized to hold, provide for distribution of its assets upon
dissolution of the said corporation, by a majority vote of such
corporation, unless otherwise provided by any such special act or the
bylaws of any such corporation, at a meeting duly called for that
purpose, and by recording a certified copy of such vote in the office of
the secretary of state. The fee for recording said certified copy in the
office of the secretary of state shall be 
                                             $25.
                                             
 II. Change its purpose by a majority vote of said corporation. A
written notice of the proposed change shall be provided to the director
of charitable trusts, department of justice and the notice of proposed
changes shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation by the
trustees at least 30 days before the vote is taken. The proposed change
shall also be submitted for review by the probate court. If legal cause
exists which would prevent the proposed change in purpose, the director
of charitable trusts shall have 30 days to notify the corporation of any
additional requirements. A certified copy of the vote shall be filed in
the office of the secretary of state. The fee for recording said
certified copy in the office of the secretary of state shall be 
                                             $25.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to supercede the intent of
RSA 7:19-RSA 7:32-a.

**Source.** 1967, 92:1. 2005, 282:1. 2006, 316:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

Dissolution of Corporation
--------------------------

### Section 292:9

 **292:9 Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. Any such corporation, or 1/4 of the members thereof, may apply by
petition to the superior court, or in the case of a charitable
corporation to the superior court or the probate court, in the county in
which the corporation is located, for a decree of dissolution, or for
such other relief as may be just; and the court, after due notice to all
parties interested and a hearing, may decree that the corporation be
dissolved, subject to such limitations and conditions as justice may
require. The attorney general shall be notified and given an opportunity
to be heard in all cases involving charitable corporations.
                                             
 II. The court shall have the right to appoint a guardian ad litem in
the event that any members or shareholders, or both, are unknown or have
abandoned a stock interest or membership interest in the corporation.
The guardian ad litem shall file a report with the court setting forth
its findings with respect to: the attempt to notify the unknown
shareholders or members or both; any response from the unknown
shareholders or members or both; and the length of time since the date
of last contact by the unknown shareholder or member with the
corporation.
                                             
 III. The court shall have the discretion, after reviewing the report
of the guardian ad litem, to conclude the extent of the rights and
interests of the shareholders or members, or both, who are unknown or
have abandoned their interests.
                                             
 IV. No member or shareholder shall be entitled to receive an amount
from a dissolution of assets greater than the member's or shareholder's
total contribution to capital or purchase price, or both, of membership
certificates. Any and all funds which may be payable to members or
shareholders, or both, who have been adjudicated to have abandoned their
interests under this section shall revert to the corporation as capital
assets.

**Source.** 1887, 72:1. 1891, 46:1. PS 147:10. PL 223:9. RL 272:8. RSA
292:9. 1991, 261:9. 1992, 284:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 292:10

 **292:10 Filing Order. –** The corporation shall cause an attested
copy of the decree of the court to be filed in the office of the
secretary of state forthwith after it is made; and when such copy has
been so filed, the corporate existence of the corporation shall
terminate in accordance with the terms of such decree.

**Source.** 1887, 72:3. PS 147:11. PL 223:10. RL 272:9.

### Section 292:10-a

 **292:10-a Dissolution by Vote. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, whenever 2/3 of the
membership or voting stock or both of any such corporation shall have
voted to dissolve the corporation, then said corporation shall be
automatically dissolved upon the filing with the secretary of state of a
statement signed under the penalties of perjury by the treasurer and a
majority of the directors or trustees setting forth (a) that at least
2/3 of the members or stockholders voted dissolution; and (b) the plan
for distribution of the corporation's assets and satisfaction of its
obligations.
                                             
 II. Whenever the voting membership of a church, organized under this
chapter, shall have voted unanimously to dissolve the church, the church
shall be automatically dissolved upon the filing with the secretary of
state of a statement signed under the penalties of perjury by the
treasurer and a majority of the directors or trustees setting forth (a)
that all members eligible to vote voted dissolution; and (b) the plan
for distribution of the church's assets and satisfaction of its
obligations.

**Source.** 1977, 407:4. 1991, 261:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 292:11

 **292:11 Records. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 339:16, I, eff. June 14,
1985.
                                             ]

Fraternal Organizations
-----------------------

### Section 292:12

 **292:12 Holding Property. –** Unincorporated societies or lodges of
Elks, Knights of Columbus, Knights of Pythias, Masons, Moose and Odd
Fellows, or other similar fraternal organizations shall be corporations
so far as may be necessary to take, hold, manage and use any gift or
grant made to them as such and any gifts or grants heretofore made to
any such societies or lodges are hereby fully ratified and confirmed to
them in their aforesaid corporate capacity, and said societies, lodges,
and organizations may sue and be sued in regard to such property in said
corporate capacity.

**Source.** 1941, 175:1. RL 272:11.

### Section 292:13

 **292:13 Deemed Corporations for What Purposes. –** The trustees or
other similar officers of such societies or lodges shall be deemed
bodies corporate for the purpose of taking and holding in succession
grants and gifts whether of real or personal estate made either to them
and their respective societies or lodges and said trustees or other
similar officers with the consent of the societies or lodges may convey
the lands or other property of such societies or lodges.

**Source.** 1941, 175:1. RL 272:12.

### Section 292:14

 **292:14 Unincorporated Association Receiving and Using Donations.
–** If a donation, grant or gift be made to any unincorporated
association, society, foundation or similar organization, it shall be a
corporation so far as may be necessary to take, hold, manage, use and
convey any such donation, gift or grant made to it. Any donations, gifts
or grants heretofore made to any such association, society, foundation
or similar organization are hereby fully ratified and confirmed to them
in their aforesaid corporate capacity, and said association, society,
foundation or similar organization may sue and be sued in regard to such
property in said corporate capacity. The directors, trustees or other
similar officers of such unincorporated association, society, foundation
or similar organization, if citizens of the United States, shall have
the power of taking, holding and conveying in succession grants, gifts
and donations whether real or personal estate made either to them and
their successors or to their respective association, society, foundation
or similar organization, or to their beneficiaries.

**Source.** 1953, 142:1, eff. May 8, 1953.

Orthodox Parishes
-----------------

### Section 292:15

 **292:15 Application of Subdivision. –** This subdivision applies to
all churches, parishes, committees and other religious organizations
governed by jurisdictions, archdioceses of any Orthodox Patriarchate,
Synod or national church of the Orthodox Church (the One Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church), recognized by the apostolic historic Orthodox
Patriarchates of Constantinople, Antioch, Moscow and Yugoslavia and in
general to all churches, congregations, parishes, committees and other
religious organizations founded or established with the intent and for
the purpose of adhering to and maintaining the apostolic and historic
communion, doctrine, discipline, canon law, tradition, worship and unity
of the Orthodox Church.

**Source.** 1955, 88:1 par. 14, eff. April 21, 1955.

### Section 292:16

 **292:16 Application for Incorporation. –** An unincorporated
church, congregation, parish or any other religious organization may
apply to the appropriate hierarch, archbishop, bishop or administrator
for permission to incorporate under this article. When such permission
has been granted in writing, it shall be attached to the certificate of
incorporation.

**Source.** 1955, 88:1 par. 15, eff. April 21, 1955.

### Section 292:17

 **292:17 Articles of Agreement. –** The articles of agreement shall
be in the form provided by law for all religious corporations and must
in addition recite therein that the purpose and intent of the
corporation is to maintain, propagate, practice and forever perpetuate
religious worship, services, sacraments and teachings in full accordance
and unity with the doctrine, ritual, canon law, faith, practice,
discipline, traditions and usages of the Orthodox Church and for the
carrying out of the said purpose and intent to maintain a religious
organization which will be adherent and obedient to the Orthodox
ecclesiastical jurisdiction and authority and which shall recognize and
remain subject to the duly appointed and canonical Orthodox hierarch,
archbishop, bishop or administrator appropriate for the Orthodox
communicant members comprising the same.

**Source.** 1955, 88:1 par. 16, eff. April 21, 1955.

Common Trust Funds
------------------

### Section 292:18

 **292:18 Charitable Corporations. –** Any charitable corporation
organized under an act of the legislature or organized or registered in
accordance with state law is empowered through its trustees or directors
to establish, maintain and operate common trust funds as provided
herewith under the appropriate standard of investment applicable to it.

**Source.** 1955, 160:1 par. 17. RSA 292:18. 1988, 93:6, eff. April 18,
1988.

### Section 292:19

 **292:19 Collective Investments. –** Said charitable corporation may
combine money and property belonging to various trusts in its care for
the purpose of facilitating investments, providing diversification and
obtaining a reasonable income; provided, however, that the participating
contributory interest of said trusts shall be properly evidenced by
appropriate bookkeeping entries showing on an annual basis the capital
contribution of and the profit and income allocable to each trust; and
provided, further, that not more than 10 percent of the fund shall be
invested in the obligations of any one corporation or organization,
excepting deposits in savings banks, obligations of the United States
and of the state of New Hampshire and its subdivisions; and provided,
further, that nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the
investment of funds of a trust in any manner not authorized by law.

**Source.** 1955, 160:1 par. 18, eff. Jan. 1, 1956.

### Section 292:20

 **292:20 Exception. –** The provisions of RSA 292:19 shall not apply
where the instrument creating the particular trust specifically
prohibits collective investment or where such an investment shall
violate any specific court order made in any particular trust.

**Source.** 1955, 160:1 par. 20, eff. Jan. 1, 1956.

### Section 292:21

 **292:21 Contributions and Withdrawals. –** Contributions to any
common trust fund shall be made on the basis of its market value at the
time such contribution is recorded in the books of the trustees. The
withdrawal of a particular trust fund from any common trust fund shall
be made proportionately on the basis of the market value of said common
trust fund at the time such withdrawal is recorded in the books of the
trustees.

**Source.** 1955, 160:1 par. 19, eff. Jan. 1, 1956.

Legislative Amendment
---------------------

### Section 292:22

 **292:22 Legislative Amendment. –** The legislature may at any time
alter, amend or repeal the charter of any voluntary corporation or the
laws under which it was established, or may modify or annul any of its
franchises, duties and liability; but the remedy against the corporation
for any liability previously incurred shall not be impaired thereby.

**Source.** 1969, 33:1, eff. May 6, 1969.

New Hampshire Charitable Foundation
-----------------------------------

### Section 292:23

 **292:23 Public and Charitable Trust Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Public Common Trust Funds. The New Hampshire Charitable
Foundation is authorized to establish one or more public common trust
funds and to accept funds for investment in such public common trust
funds from public trustees including municipal trustees, provided
however, that any investment in such public common trust fund may be
withdrawn at such times and upon such notice as rules and regulations
promulgated by the New Hampshire Charitable Foundation with the approval
of the bank commissioner shall provide. The New Hampshire Charitable
Foundation shall have full power to invest and reinvest such public
common trust fund or funds, only (a) in obligations and securities
permitted for investment by depository banks under RSA 383-B:3-303(c)
and RSA 383-B:3-303(d)(1), (2), (3), and (6); (b) obligations of the
United States; and (c) obligations of the state of New Hampshire and its
subdivisions, providing however, that not more than 10 percent of any
fund shall be invested in the obligations of any one corporation or
organization, excepting deposits in a bank as defined in RSA
383-A:2-201(a)(3) which accepts deposits, and, obligations of the United
States and of the state of New Hampshire and its subdivisions.
                                             
 II. Charitable Common Trust Funds. The New Hampshire Charitable
Foundation is authorized to establish one or more charitable common
trust funds and to accept funds for investment in such charitable common
trust funds from the trustees or managers of tax exempt organizations
under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Service of the United
States, provided however, that any investment in such charitable common
trust fund may be withdrawn at such times and upon such notice as rules
and regulations promulgated by the New Hampshire Charitable Foundation
shall provide. The New Hampshire Charitable Foundation shall have full
power to invest and reinvest such charitable common trust funds, subject
to the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by the
laws of the state of New Hampshire upon trustees of estates in making
investments providing, however that not more than 10 percent of any fund
shall be invested in the obligations of any one corporation or
organization, except deposits in savings banks, obligations of the
United States, and of the state of New Hampshire and its subdivisions.
                                             
 III. Securities. Investment securities forming a part of any such
common trust fund shall be maintained in a custodian account in a state
chartered or national bank doing business in New Hampshire. Any officer
or employee of the New Hampshire Charitable Foundation having access to
investment securities, bank accounts or cash belonging to any such
common trust fund shall be bonded.
                                             
 IV. Audited Report. At least annually the New Hampshire Charitable
Foundation shall prepare a report, audited by an independent certified
public accountant, which shall include for each common trust fund:
                                             
 (a) Balance sheet showing assets and liabilities together with
statements showing:
                                             
 (1) All investments at the beginning and end of each fiscal
year stated at both book and market values,
                                             
 (2) Changes in investments,
                                             
 (3) Realized capital gains and losses,
                                             
 (4) Expenses, including fees, charged to principal,
                                             
 (5) Capital distributions,
                                             
 (6) Net asset value of participation units at the beginning
and end of the year and at any intermediate valuation date, and
                                             
 (7) Participation unit capital distributions with the dates
thereof.
                                             
 (b) Income statement showing:
                                             
 (1) Income received,
                                             
 (2) Expenses, including fees, charged to income,
                                             
 (3) Income distributions, and
                                             
 (4) Participation unit income distributions with the dates
thereof.
                                             
 (c) List of all investors showing each investor's participation
units at the beginning and end of each fiscal year together with
additions and withdrawals.
                                             
Such audited reports shall be a public document and copies shall be
submitted to the director of charitable trusts, bank commissioner, and
department of revenue administration--municipal and property division.
                                             
 V. Value of Investments and Withdrawals. Investments in and
withdrawals from the common trust fund or funds shall be at net asset
values determined on the basis of market values.
                                             
 VI. Rules and Regulations. The New Hampshire Charitable Foundation
is authorized to issue reasonable rules and regulations with respect to
the administration of the fund or funds and such rules and regulations
pertaining to public common trust funds shall be subject to the prior
approval of the bank commissioner.

**Source.** 1969, 447:4. 1973, 544:10. 1975, 439:23. 1992, 24:2, VII.
2014, 161:5. 2015, 272:48, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Corporations Created by Legislative Act
---------------------------------------

### Section 292:24

 **292:24 Charters of Voluntary Corporations Created by Legislative
Act. –** Every voluntary corporation created by an act of the
legislature which is a private foundation as defined in section 509(a)
of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, and which is in
existence on the effective date of this section, or which is thereafter
created by an act of the legislature, is subject to the following
provisions, whether they are set forth in the legislative charter or
not:
                                             
 I. A corporation which is a "private foundation'' as defined in
section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, shall not:
                                             
 (a) Engage in any act of "self-dealing'' (as defined in section
4941(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954), which would give rise to
any liability for the tax imposed by section 4941(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954;
                                             
 (b) Retain any "excess business holdings'' (as defined in section
4943(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954), which would give rise to
any liability for the tax imposed by section 4943(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954;
                                             
 (c) Make any investment which would jeopardize the carrying out
of any of its exempt purposes, within the meaning of section 4944 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, so as to give rise to any liability for
the tax imposed by section 4944(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954;
or,
                                             
 (d) Make any "taxable expenditures'' (as defined in section
4945(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954) which would give rise to
any liability for the tax imposed by section 4945(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954.
                                             
 II. Each corporation which is a "private foundation'' as defined in
section 509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 shall distribute, for
the purposes specified in the act of incorporation, for each taxable
year, amounts at least sufficient to avoid liability for the tax imposed
by section 4942(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this subdivision impairs the rights and powers of
the courts or of the attorney general with respect to any corporation.
                                             
 IV. All references to sections of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
include amendments to those sections which are made after the effective
date of this section, and include all corresponding provisions of any
United States internal revenue laws which replace the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954.

**Source.** 1971, 379:1, eff. Aug. 27, 1971.

Renewal of Charter
------------------

### Section 292:25

 **292:25 Renewal Required. –**
                                             
 I. Every corporation organized under this chapter or by act of the
legislature shall, during the calendar year 1990, and every 5 years
thereafter, make a return in writing to the secretary of state upon
blanks to be furnished by him and shall pay a fee of 
                                             $25. The return
shall be signed by the president or other officer of said corporation.
The return shall state the corporation's principal address and the names
and addresses of all the officers and directors or the governing board
of the corporation. Any corporation which does not renew its charter as
provided in this subdivision shall have its charter repealed, revoked
and annulled; shall lose any right or title to the name under which it
was incorporated; and shall be so advised in writing by the secretary of
state.
                                             
 II. The disposition of any corporate assets of any corporation that
is dissolved under this section shall be performed in accordance with
RSA 292:29.

**Source.** 1975, 95:1. 1985, 339:2. 1988, 93:7. 1989, 408:65. 1991,
261:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 292:26

 **292:26 Reinstatement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 93:10, eff. April 18,
1988.
                                             ]

### Section 292:27

 **292:27 Publication Notice. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 339:16, II, eff.
June 14, 1985.
                                             ]

### Section 292:28

 **292:28 Reinstatement Following Publication. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985,
339:16, III, eff. June 14, 1985.
                                             ]

### Section 292:29

 **292:29 Disposition of Corporate Assets. –**
                                             
 I. Any corporation whose charter is repealed, revoked and annulled
pursuant to this subdivision shall, nevertheless, continue as a body
corporate for the term of 3 years from the date such charter is
repealed, revoked and annulled for the purpose of presenting and
defending suits by or against it and of closing and settling its
concerns and distributing its assets, including the disposition and
transfer of all corporate assets and property, subject to paragraphs II
and III.
                                             
 II. For the purpose of any suit or action by or against any such
corporation, pending at the end of said term of 3 years, such
corporation shall continue as a body corporate until 90 days after final
judgment or decree in such suit or action.
                                             
 III. The superior court may at any time when it shall be made to
appear, upon the petition of any interested party, that the protection
of proprietary or other rights requires the doing of any act or thing by
or in behalf of any such corporation, order the doing of such acts or
things, and for this purpose may appoint and authorize an agent to act
for and in the name of such corporation, and any action so ordered and
done shall be effective corporate action. The probate court shall have
concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court to grant relief in the
case of petitions involving charitable corporations brought under this
section. The attorney general shall be notified and given an opportunity
to be heard in all cases involving charitable corporations.
                                             
 IV. All corporate assets and property are to be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions for dissolution as set forth in the
articles of agreement, the bylaws, and in accordance with RSA 292:8 and
292:9.

**Source.** 1975, 95:1. 1991, 261:12, 13. 1992, 284:6, eff. Jan. 1,
1993.

### Section 292:30

 **292:30 Revival of Charter. –**
                                             
 I. Any corporation whose charter has been repealed, revoked, and
annulled pursuant to this subdivision may at any time apply for revival
of its certificate of incorporation, together with all the rights,
franchises, privileges, and immunities and subject to all of its duties,
debts, and liabilities which have been secured or imposed by its
original charter and all amendments thereto; provided, that if the
corporation name is no longer available under the terms of RSA 292:3,
the corporation shall file with its application for revival an amendment
changing its name or a consent to use its original name.
                                             
 II. The application for revival of the charter may be procured by
filing an application for revival in the office of the secretary of
state, which application is signed under oath and under penalties of
perjury by an officer of the corporation and which certificate states:
                                             
 (a) The name of the corporation, which shall be the name it bore
when its certificate of incorporation expired;
                                             
 (b) The address at which the business of the corporation is to be
carried on;
                                             
 (c) The names and addresses of all the officers and directors or
governing board of the corporation;
                                             
 (d) That the corporation desiring to be revived and so reviving
its charter was organized under the laws of this state;
                                             
 (e) The facts as may show that the charter has been forfeited
pursuant to this subdivision;
                                             
 (f) That the application is filed by authority of those who were
directors or members of the governing body of the corporation at the
time its charter was repealed, revoked, and annulled, or who were
elected directors or members of the governing body of the corporation as
provided in paragraph VI of this section;
                                             
 (g) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (h) That the corporation has, as of the date of its application
for revival, continued to operate consistent with its charter since such
charter was repealed, revoked, and annulled; and
                                             
 (i) That such revival will be in the public good.
                                             
 III. Upon the filing of the application for revival, the secretary
of state shall determine the completeness and accuracy of the
application and schedule a hearing on such application pursuant to RSA
293-A:14.22-a. When the revival is effective, the corporation shall be
revived with the same force and effect as if its charter had not been
forfeited pursuant to this subdivision. Such reinstatement shall
validate all contracts, acts, matters and things made, done and
performed within the scope of its charter by the corporation, its
officers and agents during the time when its charter was forfeited
pursuant to this subdivision, with the same force and effect and to all
intents and purposes as if the charter had at all times remained in full
force and effect, except as provided in paragraph IX. All real and
personal property, rights and credits, which belonged to the corporation
at the time its charter became forfeited pursuant to this subdivision
and which were not disposed of prior to the time of its revival shall be
vested in the corporation after its revival as fully and amply as they
were held by the corporation at and before the time its charter became
forfeited pursuant to this subdivision; and the corporation after its
revival shall be as exclusively liable for all contracts, acts, matters
and things made, done or performed in its name and on its behalf by its
officers and agents prior to its reinstatement, as if its charter had at
all times remained in full force and effect.
                                             
 IV. Any corporation seeking to revive its charter under the
provisions of this chapter shall pay to the secretary of state a sum
equal to all fees in arrears and due at the time its charter became
forfeited pursuant to this subdivision plus a fee of 
                                             $50.
                                             
 V. If a sufficient number of the last acting officers of any
corporation desiring to revive its charter are not available by reason
of death or unknown address, the directors of the corporation or those
remaining on the board, even if only one, may elect successors to such
officers. In any case where there shall be no directors of the
corporation available for the purposes aforesaid, the stockholders may
elect a full board of directors as provided by the bylaws of the
corporation and shall then elect such officers as are provided by law,
by the certificate of incorporation or by the bylaws to carry on the
business and affairs of the corporation. A special meeting of the
stockholders for the purposes of electing directors may be called by any
officer, director or stockholder upon notice, which notice shall state
the date, place and time of the meeting and the purpose thereof.
                                             
 VI. After a revival of the charter of the corporation shall have
been effected (except where a special meeting of stockholders has been
called in accordance with the provisions of paragraph V), the officers
who signed the certificate of revival shall, jointly, forthwith call a
special meeting of the stockholders of the corporation upon written
notice, which notice shall state the date, place and time of the meeting
and the purpose thereof. At the special meeting the stockholders shall
elect a full board of directors, which board shall then elect such
officers as are provided by law, by the charter or by the bylaws to
carry on the business and affairs of the corporation.
                                             
 VII. For the purpose of this section, the term "director'' includes
the governing body of a corporation which has no board of directors and
the term "stockholder'' includes members of a corporation entitled to
vote for members of the corporation's governing body.
                                             
 VIII. If the secretary of state is not satisfied that a certificate
of revival is authorized by the directors or stockholders of a
corporation as required by this section, he may decline to accept the
certificate and the revival shall not occur.
                                             
 IX. Revival of a charter under this section shall not be construed
to influence any pending actions or otherwise affect any liabilities or
interfere with any course of action against such corporation for the
period during which the charter was repealed or revoked.

**Source.** 1978, 21:1. 1988, 93:8, 9. 1991, 7:7, 8, 11. 2014, 179:1,
eff. Sept. 9, 2014.

Abandonment of Stock
--------------------

### Section 292:31

 **292:31 Abandonment of Stock or Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. Stock or membership certificates in a voluntary corporation, in
the absence of bylaws which mandate rules regarding abandonment, which
stock or certificates are evidenced by records available to the
corporation, are presumed abandoned, and such stock or certificates
shall be held by the corporation if the owner within 3 years has not:
                                             
 (a) Communicated in writing with the corporation regarding the
stock or a dividend, distribution or other sum payable as a result of
the interest;
                                             
 (b) Otherwise communicated with the corporation regarding the
stock, as evidenced by a memorandum or other record on file with the
corporation prepared by an employee of the corporation; or
                                             
 (c) Has not exercised its ownership rights, including voting
rights, regarding the stock.
                                             
 II. At the expiration of a 3-year period following the failure of
the owner to assert its rights under its stock, the stock is not
presumed abandoned unless there have been at least 2 notices mailed to
the owner's last address as reflected in the corporation's records which
do not disclose this address to be inaccurate. These notices shall be
sent at least 12 months apart from each other and the last of these 2
notices shall be sent 90 days prior to the termination of the 3-year
period.
                                             
 III. The running of the 3-year period of abandonment ceases
immediately upon the occurrence of a communication by the owner to the
corporation.
                                             
 IV. At the time the stock is presumed abandoned under this section,
any dividend, distribution, or other sum then held for, or owing to the
owner as a result of the stock and not previously presumed abandoned
shall be presumed abandoned.
                                             
 V. The corporation holding the presumedly abandoned stock shall
report to the state treasurer concerning the property.
                                             
 VI. The report shall be verified and shall include:
                                             
 (a) The name, if known, and last known address, if any, of each
person appearing from the records of the corporation to be the owner of
property of the value of 
                                             $25 or more presumed abandoned under this
chapter.
                                             
 (b) A description of the property and the place where it is held
and where it may be inspected by the state treasurer and any amounts
owing to the corporation.
                                             
 (c) The nature and identifying number, if any, or description of
the property and the amount appearing from the records to be due, but
items of value under 
                                             $25 each may be reported in the aggregate.
                                             
 (d) The date of the last transaction with the apparent owner with
respect to the property.
                                             
 (e) Other information the state treasurer prescribes by rules
adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to the administration of this
section.
                                             
 VII. The report shall be filed before November 1 of each year for
the property presumed to be abandoned as of June 30 of that year. On
written request by any corporation required to file a report, the state
treasurer may postpone the reporting date.
                                             
 VIII. Not more than 120 days before filing the report required by
this section, the holder in possession of property abandoned and subject
to custody as unclaimed property under this section shall send written
notice to the apparent owner at his last known address informing him
that the corporation is in possession of property subject to this
section if:
                                             
 (a) The corporation has in its records an address for the
apparent owner which the corporation's records do not disclose to be
inaccurate.
                                             
 (b) The claim of the apparent owner is not barred by the statute
of limitations.
                                             
 (c) The property has a value of 
                                             $25 or more.
                                             
 IX. Within 120 days from the termination of the 3-year abandonment
period, the state treasurer, after review of the report submitted by the
corporation and the finding that all procedural requirements have been
performed, and if the report is deemed to be correct and the procedures
are deemed to have been performed properly, the state treasurer shall
declare the property abandoned, and the corporation shall have a right
to retain the abandoned property as capital assets.

**Source.** 1991, 261:14, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.
