---
title: CHAPTER 295 GENERAL POWERS OF CORPORATIONS
---

TITLE XXVII
                                             
CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROPRIETORS OF COMMON LANDS
===========================================================

CHAPTER 295
                                             
GENERAL POWERS OF CORPORATIONS
------------------------------

Meetings, Bylaws, Reports, Etc.
-------------------------------

### Section 295:1

 **295:1 Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter do not apply
to public municipal corporations, such as towns and cities. They do not
apply to corporations organized under or adopting the provisions of RSA
294 and 301, excepting the provisions of RSA 295:10 and 11, and also RSA
297.

**Source.** GS 133:1. GL 147:1. PS 148:1. PL 226:1. 1931, 104:1. RL
275:1.

### Section 295:2

 **295:2 Inclusions. –** The rights, powers and duties set forth in
this chapter are incident to all corporations legally constituted not
excepted in RSA 295:1, subject to any limitations or restrictions
imposed by their charters or articles of association or the laws under
which they were organized.

**Source.** GS 133:2. GL 147:2. PS 148:2. PL 226:2. RL 275:2.

### Section 295:3

 **295:3 Powers. –** Every such corporation may admit associates and
members, and for just cause remove them; may elect all necessary
officers, define their duties and fix their compensation; may have a
common seal, and change the same at pleasure; may sue and be sued,
appear, prosecute and defend in the corporate name to final judgment and
execution, and appoint agents and attorneys for that purpose; and shall
have perpetual succession, unless incorporated or formed for a limited
term or dissolved as provided by law.

**Source.** RS 145:4, 9. CS 152:4, 7. GS 133:3. GL 147:3. PS 148:3. PL
226:3. RL 275:3.

### Section 295:4

 **295:4 First Meeting. –** Any 3 of the 5 grantees first named in
the charter of a corporation (unless otherwise provided therein), or any
3 of the first 5 signers of the articles of agreement by which a
corporation is formed, may call the first meeting of the members or
stockholders by giving to each in hand, or leaving at the abode of each,
or by sending through the mails, postpaid, to the post office address of
each, a notice of the time and place of the meeting, 7 days at least
before the day of meeting. Such meeting may be held without previous
notice if all the members or stockholders voluntarily assemble together
for the purpose, or it may be so held at a time and place to which they
have all agreed in writing.

**Source.** PS 148:4. PL 226:4. RL 275:4.

### Section 295:5

 **295:5 Bylaws. –** Such corporations may adopt bylaws, not
repugnant to the laws of this state, to provide for the election,
removal and retiring of members; to fix the times and places of holding
meetings and the manner of calling and conducting them; to regulate the
number of officers, the manner of choosing them, their tenure of office
and their powers and duties; and to promote the objects of the
corporation; and they may alter and amend such bylaws.

**Source.** RS 144:3. CS 152:6. GS 133:4. GL 147:4. PS 148:6. PL 226:5.
RL 275:5.

### Section 295:6

 **295:6 Contracts. –** They may make contracts necessary and proper
for the transaction of their authorized business, and no other. They
shall be capable of binding themselves as sureties or guarantors for
others, to the extent that such suretyship or guarantee may be necessary
and proper for the transaction of their authorized business or serves to
further their corporate purposes.

**Source.** GS 133:5. GL 147:5. PS 148:7. PL 226:6. RL 275:6. RSA 295:6.
1988, 13:1, eff. May 14, 1988.

### Section 295:7

 **295:7 Property. –** They may purchase, hold and convey real and
personal estate necessary and proper for the due transaction of their
authorized business, not exceeding the amount authorized by their
charter or by statute, and no other.

**Source.** RS 145:7. CS 152:7. GS 133:6. GL 147:6. PS 148:8. PL 226:7.
RL 275:7.

### Section 295:7-a

 **295:7-a Bonds and Other Obligations. –** Every such corporation
may incur liabilities, borrow money at such rates of interest as the
corporation may determine, issue its notes, bonds and other obligations
and refund the same and secure any of its obligations by mortgage or
pledge of all or any of its property, franchises and income.

**Source.** 1965, 74:2, eff. April 30, 1965.

### Section 295:7-b

 **295:7-b Power to Lease. –** Every such corporation may make or
enter into lease agreements, either as lessee or lessor, to carry out
any of its corporate purposes.

**Source.** 1965, 74:2, eff. April 30, 1965.

### Section 295:8

 **295:8 Taking Security. –** They may take mortgages or pledges or
make attachments of any property to secure the payment of debts due to
them, and may perfect a title thereto by proper legal proceedings; but
they shall sell or dispose of any property so obtained, which they are
not authorized to hold, within 5 years after the title is perfected.

**Source.** GS 133:7. GL 147:7. PS 148:9. PL 226:8. RL 275:8.

### Section 295:9

 **295:9 Alteration of Date of Annual Meeting. –** A corporation, at
any legal meeting, may alter the time of holding its annual meeting.

**Source.** RS 146:24. CS 147:33. GS 133:14. GL 147:14. PS 148:15. PL
226:9. RL 275:9.

### Section 295:10

 **295:10 Fees for Copies of Records, Etc. –** Officers of private
corporations, when required to furnish copies or certificates or to
examine records, shall be entitled to the same fees as registers of
deeds.

**Source.** PS 287:27. PL 226:11. RL 275:11.

### Section 295:11

 **295:11 Reserved Power; Limitation. –** The legislature may at any
time alter, amend or repeal the charter of any corporation, or the law
under which it was established, or may modify or amend any of its
franchises, duties or liabilities; but the remedy against the
corporation, its members or officers, for any liability previously
incurred, shall not be impaired thereby.

**Source.** RS 146:26. 1847, 487:2. GS 133:18. GL 147:18. PS 148:19. PL
226:12. RL 275:12.
