---
title: CHAPTER 299 CORPORATE MORTGAGES AND REORGANIZATION AFTER FORECLOSURE
---

TITLE XXVII
                                             
CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROPRIETORS OF COMMON LANDS
===========================================================

CHAPTER 299
                                             
CORPORATE MORTGAGES AND REORGANIZATION AFTER FORECLOSURE
--------------------------------------------------------

Mortgages
---------

### Section 299:1

 **299:1 Franchises. –** A corporation which may lawfully mortgage
its property may also include its franchises in such mortgage.

**Source.** 1905, 61:1. PL 230:1. RL 279:1.

### Section 299:2

 **299:2 After-Acquired Property. –** Except as otherwise provided,
corporate mortgage security for bonded or other indebtedness may include
after-acquired property of the following classes: Real estate,
franchises, fixtures, machinery and rolling stock.

**Source.** 1901, 66:1. 1905, 111:1. PL 230:2. RSA 299:2. 1959, 247:2,
eff. July 1, 1961.

### Section 299:3

 **299:3 Effect. –** Such mortgage of after-acquired property shall
not affect any builders' or other lien.

**Source.** 1901, 66:1. 1905, 111:1. PL 230:3. RL 279:3.

Reorganization of Corporations After Foreclosure
------------------------------------------------

### Section 299:4

 **299:4 Foreclosure Sales; Franchises. –** The foreclosure of a
mortgage of any corporation organized under the laws of this state shall
inure to the benefit of the holders of bonds, coupons and other claims
secured thereby, and whenever the franchises of the corporation are
included in the mortgage with power of sale and foreclosure is made by
decree of court, and the property, rights and franchises are sold
thereunder, the purchasers of the property, rights and franchises of
such corporation, their successors and assigns, shall be a corporation
as of the date of foreclosure for all purposes, and they are vested with
all the rights, powers, privileges, duties and liabilities of the
original corporation under its charter or the general law.

**Source.** 1895, 52:1. PL 230:4. RL 279:4.

### Section 299:5

 **299:5 Conveyance by Trustee. –** The trustee under such mortgage
may, by auction sale, convey to said purchaser or to said new
corporation all the right, title and interest under the mortgage and by
virtue of the foreclosure thereof, and thereupon said trustees shall be
discharged.

**Source.** 1895, 52:1. PL 230:5. RL 279:5.

### Section 299:6

 **299:6 First Meeting. –** The new corporation may call its first
meeting in the manner provided for calling the first meeting of the
original corporation, or any such purchaser may call the same by
publication in some newspaper published in the city of Concord.

**Source.** 1895, 52:2. PL 230:6. RL 279:6.

### Section 299:7

 **299:7 Powers. –** It may use the old corporate name, or adopt a
new one, by which it shall thereafter be known; may issue capital stock,
as the directors may determine, in an amount not exceeding the purchase
price at the foreclosure sale; shall file a certificate with the
secretary of state, signed by its treasurer and a majority of its
directors, setting forth the sale under foreclosure proceedings, the
amount of capital as fixed at the first meeting and the corporate name
adopted.

**Source.** 1895, 52:2. PL 230:7. RL 279:7.
