---
title: CHAPTER 301 COOPERATIVE MARKETING AND RURAL ELECTRIFICATION ASSOCIATIONS
---

TITLE XXVII
                                             
CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROPRIETORS OF COMMON LANDS
===========================================================

CHAPTER 301
                                             
COOPERATIVE MARKETING AND RURAL ELECTRIFICATION ASSOCIATIONS
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 301:1

 **301:1 Definitions. –** Terms used in this chapter have the
following meaning:
                                             
 I. Agricultural products includes horticultural, viticultural,
forestry, dairy, live stock, poultry, bee, and any farm products.
                                             
 II. Member includes actual members of associations without capital
stock and holders of common stock in associations organized with capital
stock.
                                             
 III. Association means any corporation organized under this
chapter.
                                             
 IV. Person includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations,
and associations.
                                             
 V. Associations organized hereunder shall be deemed nonprofit.

**Source.** 1925, 33:1. PL 224:1. RL 273:1.

Organization
------------

### Section 301:2

 **301:2 Incorporators. –** Five or more persons, a majority of whom
are residents of this state, engaged in the production of agricultural
products, may form a nonprofit, cooperative association, with or without
capital stock, under the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1925, 33:2. PL 224:2. RL 273:2.

### Section 301:3

 **301:3 Powers. –** Each association incorporated hereunder shall
have the following powers:
                                             
 I. To engage in any activity in connection with the marketing,
selling, preserving, harvesting, drying, processing, manufacturing,
canning, packing, grading, storing, handling, or utilization of any
agricultural products or the manufacturing or marketing of the
by-products thereof, any activity in connection with the purchase,
hiring or use by its members of supplies, machinery, or equipment, in
financing any of the before mentioned activities. No association,
however, shall handle agricultural products of non-members to an extent
greater in value than the products of its own members which it handles.
Nor shall such an association engaged in the purchase, hiring, or use by
its members of supplies, machinery, or equipment do such business with
nonmembers during any fiscal year in an amount greater in value than it
does business with members.
                                             
 II. To have perpetual succession in its corporate name unless
incorporated or formed for a limited term, or dissolved as provided by
law.
                                             
 III. To borrow money without limitation as to amount of incorporate
indebtedness or liability.
                                             
 IV. To make advance payments and advances to members.
                                             
 V. To act as the agent or representative of any member or members in
any of the above mentioned activities.
                                             
 VI. To purchase or otherwise acquire, to exercise all rights of
ownership or control in and to sell, transfer, or pledge, or guarantee
the payment of dividends or interest on, or the retirement or redemption
of, shares of the capital stock or bonds of any corporation or
association engaged in any related activity or in the warehousing,
handling, or marketing of any of the products handled by the
association.
                                             
 VII. To establish reserves and to invest the funds thereof in bonds
or in such other property as may be provided in the bylaws.
                                             
 VIII. To buy, hold, and exercise all privileges of ownership over
such real or personal property as may be necessary or convenient for the
conduct and operation of any of the business of the association, or
business incidental thereto.
                                             
 IX. To establish, secure, own, and develop patents, trademarks,
trade names, and copyrights.
                                             
 X. To engage in rural electrification as limited and defined by RSA
301:53.
                                             
 XI. To do everything necessary, suitable, or proper for the
accomplishment of any of the purposes or the attainment of any of the
objects herein enumerated, or conducive to or expedient for the interest
or benefit of the association, and to contract accordingly; to exercise
and possess all powers, rights, and privileges necessary or incidental
to the purposes for which the association is organized or to the
activities in which it is engaged, and, in addition, any other rights,
powers, and privileges granted by the laws of this state to corporations
organized under the general laws of this state, except such as are
inconsistent with the express provisions of this chapter; and to do any
such thing anywhere.

**Source.** 1925, 33:4. PL 224:3. 1933, 73:1. RL 273:3.

### Section 301:4

 **301:4 Organization Certificate. –** Before commencing business,
the president, treasurer, and a majority of the directors shall prepare
and file a certificate of organization, setting forth:
                                             
 I. The name of the association.
                                             
 II. The purposes for which it is formed.
                                             
 III. The place where its principal business will be transacted.
                                             
 IV. The number, names, and addresses of the directors thereof, and
their term of office.
                                             
 V. The name and residence of the clerk.
                                             
 VI. If organized without capital stock, the voting privileges of
members if otherwise than one vote to each member, whether the property
rights and interests of the members are equal, and, if unequal, the
general rules applicable to all members by which the property rights and
interests, respectively, of each member shall be determined and fixed,
and provision for the admission of new members who shall be entitled to
share in the property of the association in accordance with such general
rules. This provision or paragraph of the certificate of organization
shall not be altered, amended, or replaced except by the written consent
or vote representing 3/4 of the members.
                                             
 VII. If organized with capital stock, the amount of such stock, the
number of shares into which it is divided, and whether such stock be
with or without nominal or par value; if such stock be with nominal or
par value, the par value thereof and if such stock be without nominal or
par value, every share of such stock shall be equal to every other such
share except as may be provided in the vote authorizing the issue
thereof; the voting privileges of stockholders, if otherwise than one
vote to each stockholder, and the consideration for which capital stock
is issued in accordance with the provisions of RSA 293-A.
                                             
 VIII. The capital stock may be divided into preferred and one or
more classes of common stock. If so divided, the certificate of
organization shall contain a statement of the number of shares of stock
to which preference is granted, the number of shares of stock to which
no preference is granted, and the nature and definite extent of the
preference and privileges granted to each.
                                             
 IX. The certificate shall be subscribed by the president and a
majority of the directors and sworn to by them; and shall, after being
approved by the attorney general or assistant attorney general, be filed
with the secretary of state. A certified copy shall also be filed with
the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 X. When so filed the said certificate of organization, or a
certified copy thereof, shall be received in the courts of the state as
prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein and of the due
incorporation of such association.

**Source.** 1925, 33:6; 142:3. PL 224:4. 1931, 10:1, 2. 1939, 93:1. RL
273:4. RSA 301:4. 1995, 130:5. 2004, 248:21, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 301:5

 **301:5 Amendments to Certificate. –** An association may amend its
certificate of organization by the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the
members voting thereon at any regular meeting, or at a special meeting
called for that purpose, or if the association permits its members to
vote on the basis of patronage, by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the members and of 2/3 of the patronage, voting thereon. A written or
printed notice of the proposed amendment and of the time and place of
holding such meetings shall be delivered to each member, or mailed to
his last known address as shown by the books of the association, at
least 30 days prior to any such meetings. No amendment affecting the
preferential rights of any outstanding stock shall be adopted until the
written consent of the holders of 2/3 of the outstanding preference
shares has been obtained. Amendments to the certificate of organization,
when so adopted, shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the
preceding section.

**Source.** 1925, 33:7. PL 224:5. RL 273:5. 1945, 150:1, eff. May 9,
1945.

### Section 301:6

 **301:6 Fees for Filing. –** For filing a certificate of
organization, an association shall pay 
                                             $25 to the secretary of state;
and for filing an amendment thereto, 
                                             $25.

**Source.** 1925, 33:30. PL 224:6. RL 273:6. 1949, 265:2. 2004, 248:22,
eff. July 1, 2004.

Members
-------

### Section 301:7

 **301:7 Qualifications. –** Under the terms and conditions
prescribed in its bylaws, an association may admit as members, or issue
common stock to, only cooperative marketing associations or persons
engaged in the production of the agricultural products to be handled by
or through the association, including the lessees and tenants of land
used therefor and any lessors and landlords who receive any part of the
agricultural products produced on the leased premises or of the sale
price of such products as rent, or persons engaged in the production of
agricultural products who purchase or hire from such association
supplies, machinery or equipment for use in connection with the
production or marketing of agricultural products.

**Source.** 1925, 33:5. PL 224:7. 1933, 73:2. RL 273:7.

### Section 301:8

 **301:8 Associations. –** An association organized hereunder may
become a member or stockholder of any other association or associations
so organized.

**Source.** 1925, 33:5. PL 224:8. RL 273:8.

### Section 301:9

 **301:9 Representation. –** If a member of a nonstock association be
other than a natural person, such member may be represented by any
individual, associate, officer, manager or member thereof, duly
authorized in writing.

**Source.** 1925, 33:5. PL 224:9. RL 273:9.

Bylaws
------

### Section 301:10

 **301:10 Adoption. –** Each association shall, within 30 days after
its organization, adopt for its government and management, a code of
bylaws, not inconsistent with the powers granted hereby. A majority vote
of the members or stockholders, or their written assent, is necessary to
adopt such bylaws.

**Source.** 1925, 33:8. PL 224:10. RL 273:10.

### Section 301:11

 **301:11 Subject Matter. –** Each association may provide in its
bylaws for any or all of the following matters:
                                             
 I. The time, place and manner of calling and conducting its
meetings.
                                             
 II. The number of stockholders or members constituting a quorum.
                                             
 III. The right of members or stockholders to vote by representation
or by mail or by both; and the conditions, manner, form, and effect of
such votes.
                                             
 IV. The number of directors constituting a quorum.
                                             
 V. The qualifications, compensation, duties and term of office of
directors and officers; the time of their election and the mode and
manner of giving notice thereof.
                                             
 VI. Reasonable penalties for violations of the bylaws.
                                             
 VII. The amount of entrance, organization and membership fees, if
any; the manner of collecting the same; and the purposes for which they
may be used.
                                             
 VIII. The amount which each member or stockholder shall be required
to pay annually or from time to time, if at all, to carry on the
business of the association; the charges, if any, to be paid by each
member or stockholder for services rendered by the association to him
and the time of payment and manner of collection; and the marketing
contract between the association and its members or stockholders, which
every member or stockholder may be required to sign.
                                             
 IX. The number and qualification of members or stockholders of the
association and the conditions precedent to membership or ownership of
common stock; the method, time and manner of permitting members to
withdraw or the holders of common stock to transfer their stock; the
manner of assignment and transfer of the interest of members and of the
shares of common stock; the conditions upon which and time when a
membership shall cease; the automatic suspension of the rights of a
member when he ceases to be eligible to membership; the manner and
effect of the expulsion of a member; the manner of determining the value
of a member's interest and provision for its purchase by the association
upon the death or withdrawal of a member or stockholder, or upon the
expulsion of a member or forfeiture of his membership, or, at the option
of the association, the purchase at a price fixed by conclusive
appraisal by a board of appraisers. But in no case shall it be provided
that the value or price of the stock shall be determined by any board on
which the association shall have any greater voice than the member or
his representative.

**Source.** 1925, 33:8; 142:1. PL 224:11. RL 273:11.

Meetings
--------

### Section 301:12

 **301:12 Regular. –** In its bylaws each association shall provide
for one or more regular meetings annually.

**Source.** 1925, 33:9. PL 224:12. RL 273:12.

### Section 301:13

 **301:13 Special. –** The board of directors shall have the right to
call a special meeting at any time; and they shall call one upon the
petition of not less than 10 percent of the members or stockholders,
stating the specific business to be brought before the association.

**Source.** 1925, 33:9. PL 224:13. RL 273:13.

### Section 301:14

 **301:14 Notice. –** Notice of each meeting, together with a
statement of the purposes thereof, shall be mailed to each member at
least 10 days prior to the meeting; provided, that the bylaws may
require instead that such notice may be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation, published at the principal place of
business of the association.

**Source.** 1925, 33:9. PL 224:14. RL 273:14.

Directors
---------

### Section 301:15

 **301:15 Number; Qualifications. –** The business of the association
shall be managed by a board of not less than 5 directors, elected by the
members or stockholders from their own number.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:15. RL 273:15.

### Section 301:16

 **301:16 Election. –** The bylaws may provide that the territory in
which the association has members shall be divided into districts and
that the directors shall be elected according to such districts, either
directly or by district delegates elected by the members in that
district, and in such case the bylaws shall specify the number of
directors to be elected by each district, and the manner and method of
reapportioning the directors and of redistricting the territory covered
by the association.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:16. RL 273:16.

### Section 301:17

 **301:17 Primaries. –** The bylaws may provide that primary
elections shall be held in each district, to elect the directors
apportioned to such districts, and that the result of all such primary
elections may be ratified by the next regular meeting of the association
or may be deemed the act of the association.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:17. RL 273:17.

### Section 301:18

 **301:18 Nonmember Directors. –** The bylaws may provide that one or
more directors may be appointed by any public official or commission or
by the other directors selected by the members or their delegates. Such
directors shall represent primarily the interest of the general public
in such associations and need not be members or stockholders of the
association, but shall have the same powers and rights as other
directors. Such directors shall not number more than 1/5 of the entire
board.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:18. RL 273:18.

### Section 301:19

 **301:19 Vacancies. –** When a vacancy on the board of directors
occurs other than by expiration of term, the remaining members of the
board, by a majority vote, shall fill the vacancy, unless the bylaws
provide for an election of directors by districts, and in such a case
the board of directors shall immediately call a special meeting of the
members, or stockholders, to fill the vacancy, in the district where it
exists.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:19. RL 273:19.

### Section 301:20

 **301:20 Directors' Contracts. –** No director, during the term of
his office, shall be a party to a contract for profit with the
association differing in any way from the business relations accorded
each member or holder of common stock of the association or others, or
upon terms differing from those generally current in that district.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:20. RL 273:20.

### Section 301:21

 **301:21 Executive Committee. –** The bylaws may provide for an
executive committee and may allot to such committee all the functions
and powers of the board of directors, subject to the general direction
and control of that board.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:21. RL 273:21.

Officers
--------

### Section 301:22

 **301:22 Election; Powers. –** The directors shall elect from their
number a president and one or more vice-presidents. They shall also
elect a secretary, who shall be the clerk of the corporation, and a
treasurer, who need not be directors or members of the association; and
they may combine the 2 latter offices and designate the combined office
as that of secretary-treasurer, or unite both functions and titles in
one person. The treasurer may be a bank or any depository, and as such,
shall not be considered as an officer, but as a function, of the board
of directors, and in such case, the secretary shall perform the usual
accounting duties of the treasurer, except that the funds shall be
deposited only as and where authorized by the board of directors.

**Source.** 1925, 33:11. PL 224:22. RL 273:22.

### Section 301:23

 **301:23 Bonds. –** Each officer, employee and agent handling funds
or negotiable instruments or property of or for any association shall
give to the association a bond, satisfactory to the board of directors,
for the faithful performance of his duties and obligations.

**Source.** 1925, 33:12. PL 224:23. RL 273:23.

### Section 301:24

 **301:24 Compensation. –** An association may provide a fair
remuneration for the time actually spent by its officers and directors
in its service and for the service of the members of its executive
committee. The bylaws may provide that no director or officer shall
occupy any position in the association, on regular salary or
substantially full time pay.

**Source.** 1925, 33:10. PL 224:24. RL 273:24.

Membership and Stock Certificates, Etc.
---------------------------------------

### Section 301:25

 **301:25 Membership. –** When a member of an association established
without capital stock has paid his membership fee in full, he shall
receive a certificate of membership.

**Source.** 1925, 33:13. PL 224:25. RL 273:25.

### Section 301:26

 **301:26 Stock. –** No association shall issue stock to a member
until it has been fully paid for. The promissory notes of the members
may be accepted by the association as full or partial payment. The
association shall hold the stock as security for the payment of the
note; but such retention as security shall not affect the member's right
to vote. Until such notes are paid in full, the corresponding stock, to
the extent of unpaid balances, shall be carried on the books of the
association and upon all financial statements made by the association as
"capital stock issued for notes,'' and the notes shall be carried on
such books and statements as "notes given for capital stock.''

**Source.** 1925, 33:13; 142:2. PL 224:26. RL 273:26.

### Section 301:27

 **301:27 Individual Liability. –** No member shall be liable for the
debts of the association to an amount exceeding the sum remaining unpaid
on his membership fee or his subscription to the capital stock,
including any unpaid balance on any promissory note given in payment
therefor.

**Source.** 1925, 33:13. PL 224:27. RL 273:27.

### Section 301:28

 **301:28 Voting. –** Unless otherwise provided in the certificate of
organization, no member or stockholder shall be entitled to more than
one vote, regardless of the number of shares of stock owned by him.

**Source.** 1925, 33:13. PL 224:28. 1931, 10:3. RL 273:28.

### Section 301:29

 **301:29 Preferred Stock. –** Any association organized with stock
may issue preferred stock, with or without the right to vote. Such stock
may be sold to any person, member, or nonmember, and may be redeemable
or retirable by the association on such terms and conditions as may be
provided in the certificate of organization and printed on the face of
the stock certificate.

**Source.** 1925, 33:13. PL 224:29. RL 273:29.

### Section 301:30

 **301:30 Transfer of Voting Stock. –** The bylaws shall prohibit the
transfer of stock of the association entitled to voting rights, other
than preferred stock, to persons not qualified to be members of the
association and such restrictions shall be printed upon every
certificate of stock subject thereto.

**Source.** 1925, 33:13. PL 224:30. 1929, 66:1. 1933, 73:3. RL 273:30.

Association Contracts
---------------------

### Section 301:31

 **301:31 Marketing. –** An association and its members may make and
execute marketing contracts, requiring the members to sell, for any
period of time, not over 10 years, all or any specified part of their
agricultural products or specified commodities exclusively to or through
the association, or any facilities to be created by the association. If
they contract a sale to the association, it shall be conclusively held
that title to the products passes to the association upon delivery
except for legally recorded chattel mortgages given for value and prior
to the first day of July in any season on such products or commodities
whether such mortgages are given before or after the making of such
contract of sale. The contract may provide, among other things, that the
association may sell or re-sell the products delivered by its members,
with or without taking title thereto; and pay over to its members the
re-sale price, after deducting all necessary selling, overhead and other
costs and expenses, including interest or dividends on stock, not
exceeding 8 percent per annum, and reserves for retiring the stock, if
any; and other proper reserves; and for any other deductions.

**Source.** 1925, 33:14. PL 224:31. RL 273:31.

### Section 301:32

 **301:32 Damages, Etc. –** The bylaws or the marketing contract may
fix, as liquidated damages, a specific sum to be paid by a member or
stockholder to the association upon the breach by him of any provision
of the marketing contract regarding the sale or delivery or withholding
of products; and may further provide that the member shall pay all
costs, premiums for bonds, expenses and fees, in case any action is
brought upon the contract by the association; and any such provisions
shall be valid and enforceable in the courts of this state; and such
clauses providing for liquidated damages shall be enforceable as such
and shall not be regarded as penalties.

**Source.** 1925, 33:15. PL 224:32. RL 273:32.

### Section 301:33

 **301:33 Equitable Remedies. –** In the event of any such breach or
threatened breach of such marketing contract by a member, the superior
court may restrain by injunction further breach of the contract and may
decree specific performance thereof. Pending the termination of such an
action and upon filing a verified complaint showing the breach or
threatened breach, and upon filing a sufficient bond, the said court may
grant a temporary restraining order against the member.

**Source.** 1925, 33:15. PL 224:33. RL 273:33.

### Section 301:34

 **301:34 Landowners' Liability. –** In any action upon such
marketing agreement, it shall be conclusively presumed that a landowner,
landlord or lessor is able to control the delivery of products produced
on his land by tenants or others, whose tenancy, possession or work on
such land, or the terms of whose tenancy, possession or labor thereon,
were created or changed after execution by the landowner, landlord, or
lessor, of such a marketing agreement; and in such action, the foregoing
remedies for nondelivery or breach shall lie and be enforceable against
such landowner, landlord or lessor.

**Source.** 1925, 33:15. PL 224:34. RL 273:34.

### Section 301:35

 **301:35 Payment in Stock. –** Whenever an association with
preferred capital stock, shall purchase the stock or any property, or
interest, it may discharge the obligation so incurred, wholly or in
part, by exchanging for the acquired interest shares of its preferred
capital stock to an amount which at par value would equal the fair
market value of the stock or interest so purchased, as determined by the
board of directors. In that case the transfer to the association of the
stock or interest purchased shall be equivalent to payment in cash for
the shares of stock issued.

**Source.** 1925, 33:16. PL 224:35. RL 273:35.

### Section 301:36

 **301:36 Stock Ownership. –** An association may organize, form,
operate, own, control, have an interest in, own stock of, or be a member
of any other corporation or corporations, with or without capital stock,
and engaged in preserving, drying, processing, canning, packing,
storing, handling, shipping, utilizing, manufacturing, marketing, or
selling the agricultural products handled by the association, or
by-products thereof.

**Source.** 1925, 33:20. PL 224:36. RL 273:36.

### Section 301:37

 **301:37 Warehousing Contracts. –** If such corporations are
warehousing corporations, they may issue legal warehouse receipts of the
association against the commodities delivered, and such legal warehouse
receipts shall be considered as adequate collateral to the extent of the
usual and current value of the commodity represented thereby. In case
such warehouse is licensed, or licensed and bonded, under the laws of
this or any other state or the United States, its warehouse receipt
delivered to the association on commodities of the association or its
members, or delivered by the association or its members, shall not be
challenged or discriminated against because of ownership or control,
wholly or in part, by the association.

**Source.** 1925, 33:20. PL 224:37. RL 273:37.

### Section 301:38

 **301:38 Between Associations. –** An association may, upon
resolution adopted by its board of directors, enter into all necessary
and proper contracts and agreements and make all necessary and proper
stipulations, agreements, contracts and arrangements with any other
cooperative corporation, association or associations, formed in this or
in any other state, for the cooperative and more economical carrying on
of its business or any part thereof. Any 2 or more associations may, by
agreement, unite in employing and using or may separately employ and use
the same personnel, methods, means and agencies for carrying on and
conducting their respective businesses.

**Source.** 1925, 33:21. PL 224:38. RL 273:38.

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 301:39

 **301:39 Commissioner of Agriculture, Markets, and Food, Duties and
Powers. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may by
general or specific order prescribe such comprehensive systems of
accounting for such associations as will provide information for
rendering adequate reports and may require any such association to
render reports, in form indicated by him, which shall state the nature
and volume of business, resources, liabilities, profits, losses, and any
other facts bearing upon the financial condition of the association. The
commissioner may investigate the management of any such association and
may make the facts, relating to said management, available to the
members or stockholders of the association. He may give assistance in
the organization, or reorganization, of cooperative associations and
may, by general or specific order, require any such association doing
business in this state or in the process of organization to file with
the department a report of its promotion and organization expenses. He
may require any such association to file with the department a certified
copy of its bylaws and a certified copy of any marketing contract or
agreement between the association and its members or patrons.

**Source.** 1927, 34:1-4. RL 273:40. 1945, 73:1. RSA 301:39. 1995,
130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 301:40

 **301:40 Annual Reports. –** Each association formed under this
chapter shall prepare and submit to its annual meeting an annual report
containing the name of the association, its principal place of business;
a general statement of its business operations during the fiscal year,
showing the amount of capital stock paid for and the number of
stockholders, if a stock association, or the number of members and
amount of membership fees received, if a nonstock association; the total
expenses of operation; the amount of its assets and indebtedness or
liabilities.

**Source.** 1925, 33:17. PL 224:39. RL 273:39.

### Section 301:41

 **301:41 Forfeiture of Charter for Default. –** If any such
association shall neglect or refuse to render to the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food any report required by him under the
provisions of RSA 301:39, the charter of such association shall be
liable to forfeiture, and it shall be the duty of the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food to enforce such forfeiture by appropriate
proceedings.

**Source.** 1945, 73:2. RSA 301:41. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 301:42

 **301:42 Forbearance. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food may forbear or discontinue such proceedings at any time, upon
being satisfied that the delinquency was not willful and upon the
rendering by the association of such reports as he may deem necessary.

**Source.** 1945, 73:2. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 301:43

 **301:43 Use of Cooperative as Name. –** No person, firm,
corporation or association, hereafter organized or hereafter undertaking
to do business in this state, as a farmers' marketing association for
the sale of farm products, shall be entitled to use the word
"cooperative'' as part of its corporate or other business name or title,
unless it has complied with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1925, 33:19. PL 224:40. RL 273:41.

### Section 301:43-a

 **301:43-a Use of Name Regulated. –**
                                             
 I. A cooperative name shall not contain language stating or implying
that the association is organized for a purpose other than that
permitted by RSA 301:3 and its certificate of organization.
                                             
 II. Except as authorized by paragraphs III and IV, a cooperative
name, based upon the records of the secretary of state, shall be
distinguishable from, and not the same as:
                                             
 (a) The name of an entity incorporated, authorized, formed, or
registered to do business in this state under RSA 292, RSA 293-A, RSA
293-B, RSA 294-A, RSA 301, RSA 301-A, RSA 304-A, RSA 304-B, RSA 304-C,
RSA 305-A, or RSA 349.
                                             
 (b) A name reserved under RSA 293-A, RSA 293-B, RSA 304-A, RSA
304-B, or RSA 304-C.
                                             
 (c) The fictitious name of another foreign corporation authorized
to transact business in this state.
                                             
 (d) The name of an agency or instrumentality of the United States
or this state or a subdivision thereof.
                                             
 (e) The name of any political party recognized under RSA 652:11,
unless written consent is obtained from the authorized representative of
the political organization.
                                             
 (f) The name "farmers' market'' unless the entity meets the
definition of "farmers' market'' established in RSA 21:34-a, V.
                                             
 III. A cooperative may apply to the secretary of state for
authorization to use a name that is not distinguishable from, or is the
same as, one or more of the names described in paragraph II, as
determined from review of the records of the secretary of state. The
secretary of state shall authorize use of the name applied for if:
                                             
 (a) The holder or holders of the name as described in paragraph
II gives written consent to use the name that is not distinguishable
from the name of the applying cooperative; or if the name is the same,
one or more words are added to the name to make the new name
distinguishable from the other name; or
                                             
 (b) The other entity consents to the use in writing and submits
an undertaking in a form satisfactory to the secretary of state to
change its name to a name that is distinguishable from, and not the same
as, the name of the applying cooperative; or
                                             
 (c) The applicant delivers to the secretary of state a certified
copy of the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction
establishing the applicant's right to use the name applied for in this
state.
                                             
 IV. A cooperative may use the name, including the fictitious name,
of another domestic or foreign entity that is used in this state if the
other entity is incorporated, authorized, formed, or registered to
transact business in this state and the proposed user cooperative:
                                             
 (a) Has merged with the other entity;
                                             
 (b) Has been formed by reorganization of the other entity; or
                                             
 (c) Has acquired all or substantially all of the assets,
including the name, of the other entity.
                                             
 V. This chapter does not control the use of fictitious names.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section would prohibit the owner or owners of a
trade name registered under RSA 349 to form a domestic cooperative under
the same name as the trade name.

**Source.** 1999, 293:4. 2004, 248:23. 2009, 293:5. 2015, 188:9, 10,
eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 301:44

 **301:44 Foreign Associations. –** Any corporation or association
organized under generally similar laws of another state shall be allowed
to carry on any proper activities, operations and functions in this
state upon compliance with the general regulations applicable to foreign
corporations desiring to do business in this state, and all contracts
which could be made by any association incorporated hereunder, made by
or with such association shall be legal and valid and enforceable in
this state with all of the remedies set forth in this chapter.

**Source.** 1925, 33:22. PL 224:41. RL 273:42.

### Section 301:45

 **301:45 Adoption of Provisions. –** Any corporation or association,
organized under previously existing statutes, may, by a majority vote of
its directors be brought under the provisions of this chapter by
limiting its membership and adopting the other restrictions as provided
herein. It shall make out in duplicate a statement signed and sworn to
by a majority of its directors to the effect that the corporation or
association has, by a majority vote of the directors, decided to accept
the benefits and be bound by the provisions of this chapter and has
authorized all changes accordingly. Articles of incorporation shall be
filed as required in RSA 301:4, except that they shall be signed by the
members of the then board of directors. The filing fee shall be the same
as for filing an amendment to the certificate of organization.

**Source.** 1925, 33:23. PL 224:42. RL 273:43.

### Section 301:46

 **301:46 Existing Contracts. –** When any association shall be
hereafter incorporated hereunder, all contracts heretofore made, by or
on behalf of the same, in anticipation of such incorporation; whether
such contracts be made by or in the name of some corporation organized
elsewhere or otherwise, shall have the same validity as if made after
the passage hereof.

**Source.** 1925, 33:23. PL 224:43. RL 273:44.

### Section 301:47

 **301:47 Interference With Contracts, Etc. –** Any person or any
corporation whose officers or employees knowingly induce or attempt to
induce any member or stockholder of an association organized hereunder,
or organized under similar statutes of other states, with similar
restrictions and rights and operating in this state under due authority,
to breach his marketing contract with the association, or who
maliciously and knowingly spreads false reports about the finances or
management or activity thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person. Any person
shall be liable to the association aggrieved in a civil suit in the
penal sum of 
                                             $500 for each such offense.

**Source.** 1925, 33:24. PL 224:44. RL 273:45. RSA 301:47. 1973, 529:64,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 301:48

 **301:48 Interference by Warehousemen. –** Any person, firm or
corporation conducting a warehouse within this state who solicits or
persuades or knowingly permits any member of any association organized
hereunder to breach his marketing contract with the association by
accepting or receiving such member's products for sale or for auction or
for display for sale, contrary to the terms of any marketing agreement
of which said person or any member of the said firm or any active
officer or manager of the said corporation has knowledge or notice,
shall be liable to the association aggrieved in a civil suit in the
penal sum of 
                                             $500 for each such offense; and such association may apply
to the superior court for an injunction against such warehouseman to
prevent further breaches and a multiplicity of actions thereon. In
addition said warehouseman shall pay to the association a reasonable
attorney's fee and all costs involved in any such litigation or
proceeding at law.

**Source.** 1925, 33:25. PL 224:45. RL 273:46.

### Section 301:49

 **301:49 Contracts Legal. –** No association organized hereunder and
complying with the terms hereof shall be deemed to be a conspiracy or a
combination in restraint of trade or an illegal monopoly or an attempt
to lessen competition or to fix prices arbitrarily; and the marketing
contracts and agreements between the association and its members and any
agreements authorized in this chapter shall not be deemed illegal as
such or in unlawful restraint of trade or as part of a conspiracy or
combination to accomplish an improper or illegal purpose.

**Source.** 1925, 33:26. PL 224:46. RL 273:47.

### Section 301:50

 **301:50 Annual Fee. –** Each association organized hereunder shall
pay an annual fee of 
                                             $25 only, in lieu of all franchise, license, or
corporation taxes, or taxes or charges upon reserves held by it for
members.

**Source.** 1925, 33:29; 142:5. PL 224:47. RL 273:48. 2004, 248:24, eff.
July 1, 2004.

### Section 301:51

 **301:51 Provisions Applicable. –** The appropriate provisions of
this title and all powers and rights thereunder shall apply to the
associations organized hereunder, except where such provisions are in
conflict with or inconsistent with the express provisions hereof. But
provisions which are in conflict herewith shall not apply to the
associations herein provided for.

**Source.** 1925, 33:28. PL 224:48. RL 273:49.

### Section 301:52

 **301:52 Penalty. –** Any officer or director who shall subscribe or
make oath to any certificate provided for in RSA 301:4 and 5, which
shall contain any false statement, known by such person to be false; or
who shall do any act relative to the issue of capital stock which is not
permitted by RSA 301:25-30, inclusive, or who shall make or publish any
financial statement which he knows does not comply with the provisions
of said sections, shall be guilty of a class B felony, and shall also be
individually liable to any stockholder of the association or other
person for damage caused by reason thereof.

**Source.** 1925, 142:4. PL 224:50. RL 273:51. RSA 301:52. 1973,
528:192, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

Associations for Rural Electrification
--------------------------------------

### Section 301:53

 **301:53 Powers. –** An association incorporated under the
provisions of this section shall have the following powers:
                                             
 I. To generate, manufacture, purchase, acquire, accumulate, and
transmit electric energy, and to distribute, sell, supply and dispose of
electric energy to its members, to governmental agencies and political
subdivisions, and to other persons, but no person shall become a member
unless such person shall agree to use electric energy furnished by the
cooperative when such electric energy shall be available through its
facilities, and membership shall cease if such person shall fail or
refuse to use electric energy made available by the cooperative or if
electric energy shall not be made available by the cooperative within a
specified time after such person shall have become a member; provided,
however, that such service shall be rendered only to persons residing on
premises not receiving central station service on June 16, 1939, and to
such other persons as the public service commission may find upon
petition and after notice and hearing, that it is in the public interest
that such association should render such service; and provided, further,
that the provisions of RSA 301:7 with respect to qualifications of
members shall not apply to members of a cooperative association
organized under this paragraph.
                                             
 II. To make loans to persons to whom electric energy is or will be
supplied by the cooperative for the purpose of, and otherwise assist
such persons in, wiring their premises and installing therein electric
and plumbing fixtures, appliances, apparatus, and equipment of any and
all kinds and character, and in connection therewith, to purchase,
acquire, lease, sell, distribute, install, and repair such electric and
plumbing fixtures, appliances, apparatus, and equipment, and to accept
or otherwise acquire, and to sell, assign, transfer, endorse, pledge,
hypothecate, and otherwise dispose of notes, bonds, and other evidences
of indebtedness, and any and all types of security therefor.
                                             
 III. To construct, purchase, take, receive, lease as lessee, or
otherwise acquire, and to own, hold, use, equip, maintain, and operate,
and to sell, assign, transfer, convey, exchange, lease as lessor,
mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or encumber, electric
transmission and distribution lines or systems, electric generating
plants, lands, buildings, structures, dams, plants and equipment, and
any and all kinds and classes of real or personal property whatsoever,
which shall be deemed necessary, convenient, or appropriate to
accomplish the purpose for which the cooperative is organized.
                                             
 IV. To purchase or otherwise acquire, and to own, hold, use and
exercise and to sell, assign, transfer, convey, mortgage, pledge,
hypothecate, or otherwise dispose of or encumber, franchises, rights,
privileges, licenses, rights of way, and easements.
                                             
 V. To borrow money and otherwise contract indebtedness, and to issue
notes, bonds, and other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and to
secure the payment thereof by mortgage, pledge, deed of trust, or any
other encumbrance upon any or all of its then owned or after-acquired
real or personal property, assets, franchises, revenues, or income.
                                             
 VI. To construct, maintain and operate electric transmission and
distribution lines along, upon, under and across all public
thoroughfares, including without limitation, all roads, highways,
streets, alleys, bridges, and causeways, and upon, under, and across all
publicly owned lands, subject, however, to the requirements in respect
to the use of such thoroughfares and lands that are imposed by the
respective authorities having jurisdiction thereof upon corporations
constructing or operating electric transmission and distribution lines
or systems.
                                             
 VII. To exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided
in RSA 371 for the exercise of that power by corporations constructing
or operating electric transmission and distribution lines or systems.
                                             
 VIII. To do and perform any and all other acts and things, and to
have and exercise any and all other powers which may be necessary,
convenient or appropriate to accomplish the purpose for which the
cooperative is organized.

**Source.** 1939, 212:1. RL 273:52. RSA 301:53. 1967, 99:1, eff. July 8,
1967.

### Section 301:54

 **301:54 Application of Laws. –** Cooperative associations organized
under RSA 301:53 shall have all of the powers and privileges of
cooperatives organized under any other provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1939, 212:1. RL 273:53.

### Section 301:55

 **301:55 Reports. –** Cooperative associations organized under RSA
301:53 shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 301:7 and RSA 301:12 to
18 inclusive, provided, however, that if any such association shall file
annually with the public utilities commission, a certified copy of the
annual report required to be filed by it with any agency or department
of the United States of America pursuant to any mortgage or deed of
trust executed by it, such association shall be deemed to have complied
fully with all the requirements of this section.

**Source.** 1939, 212:1. RL 273:54.

### Section 301:56

 **301:56 Service, Right to. –** Any person not receiving central
station service who shall apply for membership in a cooperative
association organized under this subdivision and shall offer to comply
with all reasonable terms and conditions in connection therewith shall
be entitled to be admitted to membership therein and to be served
thereby and, if such application shall be denied, such person may
petition the public utilities commission which shall have power, if it
finds after a hearing that such denial was unreasonable, to order such
association to admit such person to membership and to serve such person
upon such reasonable terms and conditions as the commission shall
prescribe.

**Source.** 1939, 212:1. RL 273:55.

### Section 301:57

 **301:57 Jurisdiction of Public Utilities Commission. –**
                                             
 I. A rural electric cooperative which has had a certificate of
regulation on file with the public utilities commission for a period of
not less than 5 consecutive years, or which has not at any previous time
had a certificate of deregulation on file with the public utilities
commission, may elect to become exempt from regulation by the commission
and be removed from the definition of "public utility'' as provided in
RSA 362:2. Any election shall be approved by an affirmative vote of at
least 60 percent of those members voting by mail ballot, initiated by
petition of not less than 100 members of the cooperative and returnable
to a regular meeting of the membership. The first election shall be made
no sooner than 120 days after the effective date of this paragraph.
Subsequent elections may be held not less than one year after the most
recent previous election conducted under this paragraph. The election
shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of the cooperative's
bylaws. Within 10 days following the regular meeting of the membership
to which the results of the election are returned, the cooperative
shall, if the vote is in the affirmative, file a certificate of
deregulation with the public utilities commission, and, if the vote is
in the negative, file a certificate of regulation with the public
utilities commission.
                                             
 II. A rural electric cooperative which has had a certificate of
deregulation on file with the public utilities commission for a period
of not less than 5 consecutive years may elect to become subject to
regulation by the public utilities commission, and become a "public
utility'' as provided in RSA 362:2. The election shall be approved by an
affirmative vote of at least 60 percent of those members voting by mail
ballot initiated by petition of not less than 100 members of the
cooperative and returnable to a regular meeting of the membership. The
election shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of the
cooperative's bylaws and may be held no sooner than one year after the
most recent previous election conducted under this paragraph. Within 10
days following the regular meeting of the membership to which the
results of the election are returned, the cooperative shall, if the vote
is in the affirmative, file a certificate of regulation with the public
utilities commission, and, if the vote is in the negative, file a
certificate of deregulation with the public utilities commission.
                                             
 III. Every rural electric cooperative shall maintain on file with
the public utilities commission either a certificate of regulation or a
certificate of deregulation. Certificates of regulation and deregulation
shall be certified by a duly authorized representative of the rural
electric cooperative and shall contain the full text of the ballot
question voted upon as provided in paragraph I or II, a certification of
the vote results, and a certification that the ballot was initiated by a
petition meeting the requirements set forth in paragraphs I-II.
Certificates of regulation and deregulation shall remain on file with
the public utilities commission unless and until replaced by a
certificate of regulation or deregulation resulting from a subsequent
election.

**Source.** RL 273:56. 1951, 203:8. 1997, 229:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1998.

### Section 301:58

 **301:58 Validity of Public Utilities Commission Orders. –**
                                             
 I. The filing of a certificate of deregulation with the public
utilities commission by a rural electric cooperative shall cause the
commission to terminate the involvement of the cooperative in any
proceeding to the extent that such involvement is no longer under the
jurisdiction of the commission.
                                             
 II. Orders of the commission concerning rural electric cooperatives,
issued prior to the effective date of this section or at times when a
certificate of regulation is on file shall not be rendered invalid by
the filing of a certificate of deregulation, provided, however, that
such orders shall not be enforceable as against the cooperative while a
certificate of deregulation is on file with the commission. Nothing in
this section shall affect the validity or enforceability of orders of
the commission concerning service territory, franchise boundaries, or
any other matter over which the commission retains authority over a
cooperative for which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the
public utilities commission.

**Source.** 1997, 229:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1998.

### Section 301:59

 **301:59 PURPA Jurisdiction. –** The public utilities commission
shall retain jurisdiction over rural electric cooperatives, regardless
of whether or not a certificate of regulation or deregulation is on
file, for purpose of implementing and enforcing provisions of the Public
Utilities Regulatory Policy Act of 1978, and any successor laws
amending, replacing, or repealing the act, and regulations of the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission implementing the act.

**Source.** 1997, 229:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1998.

### Section 301:60

 **301:60 Consent to Jurisdiction. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, any rural electric cooperative, without regard to
whether a certificate of regulation or deregulation is on file with the
public utilities commission, may voluntarily consent to jurisdiction by
the commission for the purpose of participating in or initiating
proceedings before the commission. The cooperative's voluntary consent
shall be nonrevocable and shall be in writing, signed by a duly
authorized representative of the cooperative. The consent may be limited
to specific issues or requests for relief. Any voluntary consent under
this section shall be strictly limited in scope to the issues or
proceedings identified in the written consent, and shall not be
construed as a more general consent to jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1997, 229:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1998.

### Section 301:61

 **301:61 Member Access to Records and Meetings. –** A rural electric
cooperative which has filed a certificate of deregulation with the
public utilities commission shall provide its members with open access
to the cooperative's membership meetings, board meetings, and business
records to the same extent that citizens of New Hampshire are entitled
to access to public records as provided in RSA 91-A. The cooperative
shall provide notice of all regular board meetings in its newsletters or
as part of the monthly billing statement.

**Source.** 1997, 229:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1998.

### Section 301:62

 **301:62 Financial Responsibility. –** A rural electric cooperative
which has filed a certificate of deregulation with the public utilities
commission shall not, without prior authorization of the commission,
after consent to jurisdiction pursuant to RSA 301:60, notice, and
hearing, charge, through its stranded cost recovery charge, delivery
services rates, or any other rate or surcharge, any member who does not
purchase generation services provided by or acquired through such rural
electric cooperative, for any costs of generation services incurred by
such rural electric cooperative after retail competition is certified to
exist pursuant to RSA 38:36, except for electric power consumed directly
by the rural electric cooperative. Nothing in this paragraph shall
prevent any member or members from entering contracts of any duration
with such rural electric cooperative for the purchase of generation
services and being bound by their terms, including damages for
termination.

**Source.** 2001, 29:3, eff. May 22, 2001.

### Section 301:63

 **301:63 Special Contracts. –** The commission shall not order
changes in the total rates or impose stranded cost, system benefits, or
other restructuring charges under RSA 374-F if the result would be to
cause changes in the total rates charged to, or the accounting for
revenue received from customers taking service from a rural electric
cooperative under special contracts approved pursuant to RSA 378:18 for
the duration of those special contracts in effect as of May 1, 2000.

**Source.** 2001, 86:5, eff. June 19, 2001.
