---
title: CHAPTER 302 REGISTRATION OF INSIGNIA
---

TITLE XXVII
                                             
CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROPRIETORS OF COMMON LANDS
===========================================================

CHAPTER 302
                                             
REGISTRATION OF INSIGNIA
------------------------

### Section 302:1

 **302:1 Definitions. –** The term association as used in this
chapter shall include any association, lodge, order, fraternal society,
beneficial association, or fraternal and beneficial society or
association, historical, military, or veterans' organization, labor
union, foundation, federation, or any other society, organization or
association, degree, branch, subordinate lodge, or auxiliary thereof,
whether incorporated or unincorporated, the principles and activities of
which are not repugnant to the constitution and laws of the United
States or this state. The term insignia as used herein shall include a
name, badge, motto, button, decoration, charm, emblem, rosette, or other
insignia.

**Source.** 1929, 110:1. RL 185:1.

### Section 302:2

 **302:2 Registration of Insignia. –** Any association may register,
in the office of the secretary of state, a facsimile or description of
its insignia and may, by reregistration, alter or cancel the same.

**Source.** 1929, 110:2. RL 185:2.

### Section 302:3

 **302:3 Application. –** Application for such registration or
reregistration shall be made by the chief officer or officers of said
association upon blanks to be provided by the secretary of state and
such registration shall be for the use, benefit, and on behalf of all
degrees, branches, subordinate lodges and auxiliaries of said
association and the individual members thereof throughout the state. In
case of registration or reregistration of a facsimile, 2 copies of the
same shall accompany the application.

**Source.** 1929, 110:3. RL 185:3.

### Section 302:4

 **302:4 Record. –** The secretary of state shall keep a properly
indexed record of the registrations provided for herein which record
shall also show any altered or canceled registration.

**Source.** 1929, 110:4. RL 185:4.

### Section 302:5

 **302:5 Prohibited Registration. –** No registration shall be
granted or alteration permitted to any association having an insignia
similar to, imitating, or so nearly resembling as to be calculated to
deceive, any other insignia already registered under the provisions
hereof.

**Source.** 1929, 110:5. RL 185:5.

### Section 302:6

 **302:6 Certificate. –** Upon the registration as herein provided
the secretary of state shall issue to the petitioners a certificate
evidencing such registration.

**Source.** 1929, 110:6. RL 185:6.

### Section 302:7

 **302:7 Penalty. –** Any person who shall wilfully wear, exhibit,
display, print, or use, for any purpose, the insignia of any such
association duly registered hereunder unless he shall be entitled to
wear and use the same under the constitution and bylaws, rules, and
regulations of such association, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1929, 110:7. RL 185:7. RSA 302:7. 1973, 528:193, eff. Oct.
31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 302:8

 **302:8 Fees. –** The fee for each registration or reregistration
provided for herein shall be 
                                             $1.

**Source.** 1929, 110:8. RL 185:8.
