---
title: 'CHAPTER 383-C TRUST COMPANY ACT'
---

TITLE XXXV
                                             
BANKS AND BANKING; LOAN ASSOCIATIONS; CREDIT UNIONS
===================================================

CHAPTER 383-C
                                             
TRUST COMPANY ACT
-----------------

Article 1
                                             
General Provisions
------------------

### Section 383-C:1-101

 **383-C:1-101 Short Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may
be cited as the "Trust Company Act.''

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:1-102

 **383-C:1-102 Scope. –** This chapter applies to trust companies,
foreign trust companies, and qualified trust advisors. A trust company
is a nondepository state bank that engages in trust business and that is
chartered under this chapter or prior law. Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, RSA 383-A applies to trust companies, foreign trust
companies, and, as provided in article 12 of this chapter, qualified
trust advisors.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:1-103

 **383-C:1-103 Reservation of Power to Amend or Repeal. –** The
general court has power to amend or repeal all or part of this chapter
at any time, and all persons subject to this chapter are governed by the
amendment or repeal.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:1-104

 **383-C:1-104 Commissioner. –** The commissioner shall have the
powers necessary or incidental to performing all of the commissioner's
duties under this chapter, including the power to adopt rules as
provided in this chapter in accordance with RSA 541-A. All rules
previously adopted by the commissioner relating to the subject matter of
this chapter shall be subject to RSA 541-A:17, except for rules adopted
under RSA 394-A:7 which shall continue in full force and effect until
amended or repealed.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 2
                                             
Definitions
-----------

### Section 383-C:2-201

 **383-C:2-201 Definitions. –** (a) Each term defined under RSA 383-A
shall have the same meaning for purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
also apply:
                                             
 (1) "Change of ownership of a trust company'' means the
acquisition through a single transaction or a series of related
transactions of 10 percent or more of a trust company's equity. The
acquirer or acquirers of trust company equity under a change of
ownership of a trust company is or are referred to as a new owner or new
owners.
                                             
 (2) "Change of control of a trust company'' means a single
transaction or a series of related transactions that results in any of
the following consequences: (i) a direct or indirect transfer of
ownership of more than 50 percent of the issued and outstanding voting
equity of a trust company; (ii) a combination to which any trust company
is a party; (iii) the transfer by a trust company to any other person of
all or substantially all of the assets held in trust or otherwise under
management by the trust company; or (iv) conversion of a trust company
to another entity form. The acquirer or acquirers of trust company
equity or assets, the successor, or the survivor with respect to any
change of control of a trust company is or are referred to as the
acquirer or acquirers of control.
                                             
 (3) "Foreign trust company'' means an entity that is formed under
the laws of a state or jurisdiction other than this state and is
authorized to engage in trust business.
                                             
 (4) "Qualified trust advisor'' has the meaning specified in RSA
383-C:12-1201.
                                             
 (5) "Required capital'' means the total amount of capital that a
trust company is required to maintain under RSA 383-C:5-502.
                                             
 (6) "Trust business'' shall include the business of doing any or
all of the things specified in RSA 383-C:3-301(b) through RSA
383-C:3-301(q).
                                             
 (7) "Trust office'' means a place of business of a trust company,
other than its principal office, at which trust business is conducted,
but shall not include an office that provides only administrative
services or support for its trust business. The commissioner may define
by rule which administrative services or support for a trust business
would qualify for exemption from this definition and the procedure for
requesting such exemption.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 3
                                             
Trust Business
--------------

### Section 383-C:3-301

 **383-C:3-301 Trust Business Generally. –** Consistent with a
business plan and capital plan approved by the commissioner and for so
long as it is authorized to transact business in this state and holds a
valid charter as a trust company, a trust company shall have power:
                                             
 (a) To execute all the powers and possess all the privileges
conferred on state banks, other than the power to accept deposits;
                                             
 (b) To be appointed and to act as trustee, trust advisor, or trust
protector of any trust or as executor of any estate;
                                             
 (c) To be appointed and to act as receiver, assignee, or agent for
any person or entity;
                                             
 (d) To act as fiscal or transfer agent of the United States or any
other person or entity and, in that capacity, to receive and disburse
money;
                                             
 (e) To transfer, register, and countersign certificates of stock,
bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness and to act as attorney-in-fact
or agent of any entity for any purpose, statutory or otherwise;
                                             
 (f) To act as trustee under any mortgage, bonds, or debentures
issued by any person, and to accept and execute any municipal or
corporate trust;
                                             
 (g) To receive and manage any sinking fund of any entity upon those
terms as may be agreed upon between the entity and those dealing with,
or having an interest in, the sinking fund;
                                             
 (h) To collect coupons on, or interest upon, all manner of
securities, when authorized so to do, by the parties depositing the
securities;
                                             
 (i) To accept trusts from and execute trusts for married persons in
respect of the separate property of the married persons, to be their
individual or joint agent in the management of the property, and to
transact any business in relation to the property;
                                             
 (j) To act as receiver or trustee of the estate of any person, or to
be appointed to any trust by any court; to act as assignee under any
assignment for the benefit of creditors of any debtor, whether made
under statute or otherwise, and to be the custodian of any moneys or
assets paid into court;
                                             
 (k) To be appointed and to act under the order or appointment of any
court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise (i) as guardian, receiver,
trustee, committee, or conservator of the estate of any minor, any
person deemed by law to be incompetent to manage his or her affairs, or
any other conservatee, or in any other fiduciary capacity, or (ii) as
receiver, trustee, or committee of the property or estate of any person
in insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings; but this power shall not be
construed to deprive any other person of any legal right to have issued
to the person a letter of guardianship or of administration;
                                             
 (l) To be appointed and to accept the appointment of executor of, or
trustee under, the last will and testament, or administrator with or
without the will annexed, of the estate of any deceased person;
                                             
 (m) To act in a fiduciary capacity, including (i) to take, and
accept, and execute any and all trusts, duties, or powers of whatever
nature or description that may be conferred upon or entrusted or
committed to the trust company by any person; (ii) to exercise any other
authority, trust, or power conferred upon or entrusted or committed to
the trust company by grant, assignment, transfer, devise, bequest, or
otherwise; (iii) to exercise any power or authority that may be granted
to the trust company by order of any court of competent jurisdiction or
any surrogate; and (iv) to receive, take, use, manage, hold, and dispose
of, according to the terms of any trust, duty, or powers any property or
estate, real or personal, that is the subject of the trust, duty, or
power;
                                             
 (n) Generally to execute trusts of every description not
inconsistent with law;
                                             
 (o) To purchase, invest in, sell, and otherwise transact in
securities, promissory notes, bills of exchange, bonds, debentures, or
mortgages and, when moneys are borrowed or received for investment, to
provide security for the borrowing or receipt of money for investment,
so long as the trust company does not issue any surety or insurance for
investment or engage in the business of receiving or holding deposits;
                                             
 (p) To act as trustee for a New Hampshire investment trust organized
under RSA 293-B;
                                             
 (q) To act as a custodian for any person to hold the property,
including the person's securities, bonds, and cash, in custody for
safekeeping, so long as a trust company does not engage in the business
of receiving of deposits; and
                                             
 (r) To purchase for the fiduciary estate directly from underwriters
or distributors or in the secondary market:
                                             
 (1) Bonds or other securities underwritten or distributed by the
trust company or an affiliate of the trust company or by a syndicate
which includes the trust company or affiliate, provided that the trust
company discloses in any written communication or account statement
reflecting the purchase of the bonds or securities the nature of the
interest of such trust company or affiliate in the underwriting or
distribution of the bonds and securities and whether the trust company
or affiliate received any fee in connection with the purchase; and
                                             
 (2) Securities of any investment company as defined under the
federal Investment Company Act of 1940 for which the trust company or
affiliate acts as advisor, distributor, transfer agent, registrar,
sponsor, manager, shareholder servicing agent, or custodian, provided
that the trust company discloses in any written communication or account
statement reflecting the purchase of the securities the nature of the
relationship and whether the trust company or affiliate received any fee
for providing such services.
                                             
 (3) The authority granted in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this
subsection may be exercised only if:
                                             
 (i) The investment is not expressly prohibited by the
instrument, judgment, decree, or order establishing the fiduciary
relationship;
                                             
 (ii) The trust company discloses in writing to the person or
persons to whom it sends account statements its intent to exercise the
authority granted in paragraphs (i) and (ii) prior to the first exercise
of that authority; and
                                             
 (iii) The trust company procures in writing the consent of its
cofiduciaries with discretionary investment powers, if any, to the
investment.
                                             
 (4) A trust company, acting in a fiduciary capacity pursuant to
paragraphs (1) and (2), may:
                                             
 (i) Invest in the securities of an investment company,
investment trust, or other company to which the fiduciary or its
affiliate provides services in a capacity other than as trustee, such as
advisor, distributor, transfer agent, registrar, sponsor, manager,
shareholder servicing agent, administrator, or custodian, and the
investment is not presumed to be affected by a conflict between personal
and fiduciary interests if the investment complies with the prudent
investor standard pursuant to article 9 of RSA 564-B.
                                             
 (ii) Be compensated by the investment company, investment
trust, or other company for providing services in a capacity other than
as trustee, such as advisor, distributor, transfer agent, registrar,
sponsor, manager, shareholder servicing agent, administrator, or
custodian, if the fiduciary at least annually notifies each person to
whom it is required to send account statements under RSA 564-B:8-813 of
the rate and method by which the compensation was determined.
                                             
 (5) Nothing in this subsection shall affect the degree of
prudence which is required of fiduciaries under the laws of this state.
Any bonds or securities purchased under authority of this section shall
have sufficient liquidity and investment quality to satisfy the
principles of fiduciary investment and the terms of the instrument,
judgment, decree, or order establishing the fiduciary relationship.
                                             
 (6) No trust company which is acting in a fiduciary capacity
shall purchase for the fiduciary estate any fixed income or equity
security issued by the trust company or an affiliate thereof, unless the
trust company is expressly authorized to do so by the terms of the
instrument creating the trust, a court order, the written consent of the
grantor of the trust, or the written consent of the qualified
beneficiaries of the trust, as defined in RSA 564-B:1-103.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-302

 **383-C:3-302 No Acceptance of Deposits. –** A trust company shall
not have the power to accept deposits, and a trust company's
organizational instrument shall include a statement that the trust
company does not have the power to accept deposits.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-303

 **383-C:3-303 No Bond. –** Unless required by the order of a court
with proper jurisdiction, no trust company authorized to act as trustee
or executor in this state shall be required to give bond to secure
performance of the trust company's duties as trustee or executor.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-304

 **383-C:3-304 Nominees. –** Any trust company while acting in a
fiduciary or custodial capacity, either alone or jointly with a person
or persons, may cause any stock or other securities to be registered and
held in the name of a nominee without mention of the fiduciary or
custodial relationship.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-305

 **383-C:3-305 Depositing Securities. –** Any trust company while
acting in a fiduciary capacity, or as an agent or custodian or any
fiduciary acting for itself, is authorized to deposit or arrange for the
deposit of securities with a bank or other regulated financial-service
entity. At all time, the records of any trust company shall show the
name of the party for whose account the securities are so deposited.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-306

 **383-C:3-306 Denial of Charter. –** No person shall be granted a
charter to transact business as a trust company if the commissioner
determines that the applicant for a charter will not conduct the
proposed trust business by the applicant in a safe and sound manner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-307

 **383-C:3-307 Trust Company Business Plan; Amendments to Business
Plan. –** A trust company's board of directors shall adopt a business
plan that specifies (i) the trust business and other business in which
the trust company will engage, (ii) the trust company's management and
operation structures, including information technology, (iii) the trust
company's disaster recovery or contingency plan, and (iv) other
information relevant to the governance, operation, equity ownership, and
business of the trust company, including other information as may be
prescribed by the commissioner. A trust company's business plan shall be
such as will assure the safety and soundness of the trust company. A
trust company's board of directors shall obtain the commissioner's
approval of any material amendment of its business plan as provided in
RSA 383-C:8-801.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-308

 **383-C:3-308 Trust Company Capital Plan and Amendments to Capital
Plan. –** A trust company's board of directors shall adopt a capital
plan that specifies (i) the amount of the trust company's capital, (ii)
including its required capital, the quality, liquidity, and sources of
the trust company's capital, (iii) the proposed investment of the trust
company's capital and (iv) other information relevant to the capital of
the trust company, including other information as may be prescribed by
the commissioner. A trust company's capital plan shall be such as will
assure the safety and soundness of the trust company. A trust company's
board of directors also shall approve and adopt each amendment to the
trust company's capital plan. A trust company shall obtain the
commissioner's approval of any material amendment of its capital plan as
provided in RSA 383-C:8-801.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:3-309

 **383-C:3-309 Change to Approved Business Plan or Capital Plan. –**
No trust company shall engage in trust business that is materially
different from, or inconsistent with, the business plan or capital plan
approved by the commissioner. A trust company may effect a material
amendment to the trust company's business plan or capital plan under RSA
383-C:8-801.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 4
                                             
Safety and Soundness
--------------------

### Section 383-C:4-401

 **383-C:4-401 Safety and Soundness. –** For purposes of determining
the safety or soundness of a trust company or any act that a trust
company has taken or proposes to take, the commissioner shall consider
the following factors:
                                             
 (a) The nature and type of fiduciary activities that the trust
company conducts or proposes to conduct;
                                             
 (b) The complexity of fiduciary duties that the trust company has or
proposes to have;
                                             
 (c) The degree of discretion that the trust company has or proposes
to have;
                                             
 (d) The amount, nature, and types of fiduciary assets that the trust
company holds or manages, or projects to hold or manage;
                                             
 (e) The nature and type of non-fiduciary activities that the trust
company conducts or proposes to conduct;
                                             
 (f) The character, qualifications, competence, and experience of the
trust company's directors, and executive officers;
                                             
 (g) The extent and adequacy of the trust company's proposed or
existing internal controls and risk management procedures;
                                             
 (h) The amount of the trust company's capital, fidelity bond, and
errors and omissions insurance, and the adequacy of those resources for
purposes of protecting the trust company's clients;
                                             
 (i) The ability of a parent or affiliate of the trust company to
serve as a source of strength for the trust company;
                                             
 (j) The quality, liquidity, amount, and source of the trust
company's capital;
                                             
 (k) The market or markets that the trust company serves or proposes
to serve;
                                             
 (l) The trust company's financial success, the prospects for future
financial success, and the reasonableness of its business plans;
                                             
 (m) The existence and adequacy of insurance obtained or held by the
trust company for the purpose of protecting the trust company's clients
and the settlors and beneficiaries of any trust of which the trust
company is serving or proposes to serve as a trustee;
                                             
 (n) The quality and results of prior financial audits and any
fiduciary compliance audits, and the results of prior examinations;
                                             
 (o) The adequacy of the trust company's operating systems, such as
the trust company's information technology systems, the trust company's
cybersecurity systems, and the trust company's disaster protection and
recovery systems;
                                             
 (p) The trust company's past experience complying with applicable
laws and its potential for compliance with applicable laws in the
future; and
                                             
 (q) Any other relevant factors under rules that the commissioner may
adopt.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:4-402

 **383-C:4-402 Consideration of Safety and Soundness of Trust
Companies. –** The commissioner shall consider the safety and soundness
of a trust company and may make findings relative to a trust company's
safety and soundness: (i) when considering any application or notice
submitted by a trust company or by any person proposing to be chartered
as a trust company; (ii) when examining or investigating the trust
company; (iii) when determining whether or not to initiate any
proceeding or issue any no-objection letter, notice, determination; (iv)
or order in respect of a trust company, its directors, or its officers,
or otherwise as required by this chapter or as the commissioner
determines in the commissioner's discretion.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 5
                                             
Required Capital; Fidelity Bond; Liability Insurance; Liquidation Pledge
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 383-C:5-501

 **383-C:5-501 Required Capital, Fidelity Bond, Liability Insurance
Generally. –** A trust company shall maintain the level of capital
required under RSA 383-C:5-502, a fidelity bond under RSA 383-A:4-405,
an errors and omissions liability insurance policy under RSA
383-A:4-406, and a liquidation pledge under RSA 383-C:5-503. The
commissioner shall consider a trust company's safety and soundness and
the protection of the trust company's clients in determining the
appropriate amounts of required capital, fidelity bond coverage,
liability insurance coverage, and liquidation pledge for the trust
company.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:5-502

 **383-C:5-502 Required Capital. –** (a) The minimum required capital
of a trust company is 
                                             $500,000. The commissioner may require a trust
company to maintain required capital in excess of the minimum required
capital.
                                             
 (b) After a trust company is granted authority to transact business,
a trust company shall maintain capital consistent with the trust
company's capital plan and not less than the required capital determined
by the commissioner for the trust company. Upon notice to a trust
company and in consideration of the trust company's safety and
soundness, the commissioner may: increase the amount of the trust
company's required capital, or the commissioner may reduce the amount of
trust company's required capital. All changes to the trust company's
required capital shall be reflected in one or more amendments to the
trust company's capital plan.
                                             
 (c) After a trust company is granted authority to transact business,
a trust company shall hold and invest its capital, including the trust
company's required capital, in accordance with the trust company's
capital plan. The investment of a trust company's capital shall be in
manner consistent with the prudent investor standard under RSA
564-B:9-902. Consistent with trust company safety and soundness and the
prudent investor standard, a trust company's capital plan may permit a
trust company to invest a portion of its capital, including a portion of
the trust company's required capital, in any investment that has
principal risk.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:5-503

 **383-C:5-503 Liquidation Pledge. –** (a) To defray the costs of
liquidation of a trust company by the commissioner under RSA 395, a
trust company shall pledge to the commissioner cash or securities in
accordance with this section. In the event of a liquidation of a trust
company under RSA 395 and without regard to any priorities, preferences,
or adverse claims, the commissioner may claim all or any amount of the
cash or securities so pledged, as applicable, liquidate the claimed
securities, and, as soon as practicable, utilize the cash claimed or
received upon liquidation of pledged securities to defray the costs of
the trust company liquidation. To satisfy the obligation of a trust
company to provide liquidation pledge, the trust company's parent or
affiliate may pledge cash or securities on behalf of the trust company.
The commissioner may specify the types of securities that may be
pledged, or the commissioner may require a pledge of cash. The pledged
cash or securities shall be held at a bank located in this state, a
Federal Reserve Bank, or any other depository entity approved by the
commissioner in the commissioner's discretion. Any fees associated with
establishing and maintaining a pledge under this section shall be the
responsibility of the trust company.
                                             
 (b) In consideration of the safety and soundness of a trust company,
the commissioner shall determine and, upon notice to a trust company,
may increase or reduce the amount of cash or the value of securities
pledged to the commissioner under this section so long as the amount of
cash or value of securities required to be pledged is not less than

                                             $250,000 nor more than 
                                             $1,000,000. If the commissioner requires a
trust company to increase the trust company's required liquidation
pledge, then the commissioner shall afford the trust company a
reasonable time within which to achieve the increase in the trust
company's required liquidation pledge and shall specify the reasonable
time in the notice of increase provided to the trust company under this
section. The amount of cash or value of securities pledged by a trust
company shall not be reduced below the level determined by the
commissioner, as adjusted by the commissioner, except (i) upon
liquidation of the trust company under RSA 395, or (ii) as permitted to
fund a special assessment under RSA 383:11-b.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 6
                                             
Directors and Officers
----------------------

### Section 383-C:6-601

 **383-C:6-601 Number of Directors. –** The board of directors of a
trust company shall be composed of at least 5 directors. A director need
not be a resident of New Hampshire or a citizen of the United States,
unless otherwise required by the commissioner in consideration of the
trust company's safety and soundness.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:6-602

 **383-C:6-602 Board Meetings. –** A trust company's board of
directors shall meet on a regular basis no less than once each calendar
quarter or with greater frequency as the board determines is necessary
or as the commissioner requires in consideration of the trust company's
safety and soundness.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:6-603

 **383-C:6-603 Officers. –** (a) In the case of a trust company
organized as a corporation, the trust company shall have a president, a
treasurer, and a secretary and may appoint one or more other officers.
                                             
 (b) In the case of a trust company organized as a limited liability
company, the trust company shall have one or more officers, whose
titles, duties, and powers are set forth in the trust company's
governing documents. The trust company shall designate each officer
whose duties and powers are functionally equivalent to the duties and
powers customarily held by the president, treasurer, or secretary of a
corporation.
                                             
 (c) The board of directors shall appoint each officer in accordance
with the trust company's governing documents. The board of the directors
shall have the power to remove each officer. Except as otherwise
provided in the governing documents, an officer shall serve for a term
that that does not exceed 3 years.
                                             
 (d) RSA 383-A:5-504 shall not apply to trust companies.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 7
                                             
Offices
----------

### Section 383-C:7-701

 **383-C:7-701 Offices Generally. –** A trust company may operate out
of one or more trust offices and other offices located within the state
or in any other state or jurisdiction consistent with the trust
company's business plan.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:7-702

 **383-C:7-702 Opening or Relocation of Trust Office. –** Before
opening or relocating a trust office, other than an opening or
relocation that is expressly provided in the trust company's business
plan approved by the commissioner, a trust company that, under the MOECA
components under the Uniform Interagency Trust Rating System, has a
composite rating of at least 2 as a result of its most recent
examination by the commissioner, shall provide the commissioner with
written notice of its proposal to open or relocate a trust office as
required under RSA 383-A:6-602. All other trust companies shall submit
an application to establish a trust office under RSA 383-A:6-602. A
trust company may proceed with the opening or relocation of the trust
office if permitted by the commissioner under RSA 383-A:6-604.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:7-703

 **383-C:7-703 Trust Office Closure. –** At least 10 days before
closing a trust office, a trust company shall provide notice of the
closure to the commissioner under RSA 383-A:6-602 and may proceed to
close the trust office after filing the notice without further action by
the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:7-704

 **383-C:7-704 Examination of Out-of-State Trust Offices. –** The
commissioner may enter into agreements with any regulatory authority
having jurisdiction to examine out-of-state trust offices of trust
companies. For those examinations, a trust company shall pay (i) an
examination fee calculated in accordance with RSA 383:11, I, and (ii)
the actual cost of travel, lodging, meals, and other expenses of
examination personnel employed in making examinations under this
section.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 8
                                             
Trust Company Changes
---------------------

### Section 383-C:8-801

 **383-C:8-801 Application for Change of Trust Company Business Plan
or Capital Plan. –** (a) Before the effective date of any material,
proposed change to the business plan or the capital plan of a trust
company, the trust company shall file an application with the
commissioner describing the material, proposed amendment to its business
plan or capital plan as required under RSA 383-A:6-602 and this
section.
                                             
 (b) The application concerning a material, proposed change of
business plan or capital plan of a trust company shall include the
following information:
                                             
 (1) The terms and conditions of each material, proposed change to
the business plan or the capital plan of the trust company and the
proposed effective date of the change.
                                             
 (2) A description of any impact of the each material, proposed
change to the business plan or to the capital plan of the trust company
on the trust company's safety and soundness.
                                             
 (c) No material, proposed change to the business plan or the capital
plan of a trust company shall be effective until the commissioner,
acting under RSA 383-A:6-604, approves the proposed change.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:8-802

 **383-C:8-802 Application for Change of Ownership of Trust Company.
–** (a) Before consummation of any proposed change of ownership of a
trust company, the new owner or new owners of trust company equity shall
file an application with the commissioner describing the proposed change
of ownership of the trust company as required under RSA 383-A:6-602 and
this section. The application for a proposed change of ownership of a
trust company shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner and
shall include the following information:
                                             
 (1) The identity, personal history, business background, and
experience of the proposed new owner or new owners, including (i) each
new owner's material business activities and affiliations during the
past 5 years, (ii) a description of any material pending legal or
administrative proceedings in which the new owner is a party and (iii) a
description of any criminal indictment or conviction of the new owner by
a state or federal court. To fulfill the requirements of (iii), the
commissioner may require the proposed owner or owners to submit to a
criminal history records check by following the procedure prescribed
under RSA 383-A:3-305(e)(3)-(4);
                                             
 (2) A statement of the assets and liabilities of each new owner
as of the end of the fiscal year for each of the 3 fiscal years
immediately preceding the date of the notice and an interim statement of
the assets and liabilities of the new owner as of a date not more than
90 days before the date of the notice;
                                             
 (3) The material terms and conditions of the proposed change of
ownership of the trust company and the manner in which the transaction
is to be consummated.
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in subsection (c), a change of ownership of a
trust company shall not be effective until the commissioner, acting
under RSA 383-A:6-604, approves the proposed change of ownership.
                                             
 (c) If a change of ownership of a trust company occurs by reason of
an involuntary change of ownership outside the reasonable control of the
owner of trust company equity, then the trust company, either alone or
with the new owner or new owners, shall file with the commissioner the
application described in subsection (a) as promptly as reasonably
practicable after the occurrence of that involuntary change of
ownership. Any new owner or new owners holding trust company equity as a
result of an involuntary change of ownership shall hold the trust
company equity subject to determination of the commissioner under RSA
383-C:8-804.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015. 2016, 230:2, eff. Aug. 8,
2016.

### Section 383-C:8-803

 **383-C:8-803 Application for Change of Control of Trust Company.
–** (a) Before consummation of any proposed change of control of a trust
company, the trust company, either alone or with the acquirer or
acquirers of control, shall file an application with the commissioner
describing the proposed change of control of the trust company as
required under RSA 383-A:6-602 and this section. The application for a
proposed change of control of a trust company shall be in the form
prescribed by the commissioner and shall include the following
information:
                                             
 (1) The identity, personal history, business background, and
experience of the proposed acquirer or acquirers of control, including
(i) each acquirer's material business activities and affiliations during
the past 5 years, (ii) a description of any material pending legal or
administrative proceedings in which the acquirer is a party and (iii) a
description of any criminal indictment or conviction of the acquirer by
a state or federal court. To fulfill the requirements of (iii), the
commissioner may require the proposed owner or owners to submit to a
criminal history records check by following the procedure prescribed
under RSA 383-A:3-305(e)(3)-(4);
                                             
 (2) A statement of the assets and liabilities of any acquirer of
control as of the end of the fiscal year for each of the 5 fiscal years
immediately preceding the date of the notice, together with related
statements of income and source and application of funds for each of the
fiscal years then concluded, and an interim statement of the assets and
liabilities for any person, together with related statements of income
and source and application of funds, as of a date not more than 90 days
before the date of the notice;
                                             
 (3) The material terms and conditions of the proposed change of
control of the trust company and the manner in which the transaction is
to be made;
                                             
 (4) The identity, source, and amount of the funds or other
consideration used or to be used in consummating the change of control
of a trust company and, if any part of these funds or other
consideration has been or is to be borrowed or otherwise obtained for
the purpose of effecting the change of control, a description of the
transaction, the names of the parties to the transaction, and any
arrangements, agreements, or understandings with these transaction
parties;
                                             
 (5) Any plans or proposals which any acquirer may have to
liquidate the trust company, to sell its assets or combine it with any
company, or to make any other material change in the business,
structure, operations, capital, or management of the trust company; and
                                             
 (6) Any additional relevant information in such forms as the
commissioner may require by specific request in connection with any
particular notice.
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in subsection (c), a change of control of a
trust company shall not be effective until the commissioner, acting
under RSA 383-A:6-604, approves the proposed change of control.
                                             
 (c) If a change of control of a trust company occurs by reason of an
involuntary change of control outside the reasonable control of the
trust company and each of the owners of trust company equity, then the
trust company, either alone or with the acquirer or acquirers of
control, shall file with the commissioner the application described in
subsection (a) as promptly as reasonably practicable after the
occurrence of that involuntary change of control. Any acquirer or
acquirers of control acquiring control over a trust company as a result
of an involuntary change of control shall hold control, including
equity, assets, or other rights so acquired in trust, pending
determination of the commissioner under RSA 383-C:8-804.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015. 2016, 230:3, eff. Aug. 8,
2016.

### Section 383-C:8-804

 **383-C:8-804 Commissioner Determination. –** After receipt of an
application under RSA 383-C:8-801, RSA 383-C:8-802, or RSA 383-C:8-803
that is deemed substantially complete under RSA 383-A:6-603, the
commissioner shall make a determination under RSA 383-A:6-604.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:8-805

 **383-C:8-805 Disapproval. –** (a) If the proposed change would
adversely affect the safety and soundness of the trust company, then the
commissioner may make a decision under RSA 383-A:6-604 to disapprove a
proposed change to a capital plan or business plan, a proposed change of
ownership of a trust company, or a proposed change of control of a trust
company.
                                             
 (b) In addition to the reasons for disapproval under subsection (a),
the commissioner may make a decision under RSA 383-A:6-604 to disapprove
a proposed change of ownership of a trust company or a proposed change
of control of a trust company for any of the following reasons:
                                             
 (1) The proposed change of ownership of the trust company or the
proposed change of control of the trust company would violate any law,
including any securities law of this state;
                                             
 (2) The financial condition, competence, experience, or integrity
of any acquirer is such as might jeopardize the safety and soundness of
the trust company, including any successor to the trust company, or
prejudice the interests of the clients of the trust company; and
                                             
 (3) Any acquirer neglects, fails, or refuses to furnish the
commissioner all the information required by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:8-806

 **383-C:8-806 Internal Reorganization not a Change in Ownership or
Change in Control. –** The acquisition or transfer of the equity or
indirect ownership of a trust company between entities under common
control that are affiliated with the trust company, so that, after
giving effect to the acquisition or transfer, the ultimate, indirect
ownership of the trust company remains the same, shall not be considered
a change of ownership of the trust company or a change in control of the
trust company for purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:8-807

 **383-C:8-807 Interim Trust Company. –** If an interim entity is
formed solely for the purpose of effecting a change in control of any
trust company that is authorized to conduct trust business under a valid
charter, the interim entity shall not be obligated to obtain a charter
or authority to transact business as a state bank subject to the
supervision of the commissioner so long as the only business or activity
in which the interim entity engages is to effect a change of control of
a trust company permitted under this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 9
                                             
Conservatorship to Address Safety and Soundness Issues
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 383-C:9-901

 **383-C:9-901 Appointment of Conservator. –** If the commissioner
determines that the business of any trust company is being conducted in
an unsafe or unsound manner, then the commissioner may appoint a
conservator for the trust company under RSA 396 who shall immediately
take charge of the operation of the trust company for the purpose of
correcting any unsafe or unsound condition or operation. After
appointment, the conservator shall continue to serve under the direction
of the commissioner for a period of time as the commissioner determines
is reasonable and necessary or until relieved by order of the
commissioner or of a court of competent jurisdiction. The conservator's
salary, which shall be determined by the commissioner, and expenses
shall be borne by the trust company under conservatorship. Except as
provided in this section, a conservatorship of a trust company shall be
governed by RSA 396.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 10
                                             
Dissolution
-----------

### Section 383-C:10-1001

 **383-C:10-1001 Authority to Dissolve. –** A trust company may
voluntarily dissolve in the manner provided in this article. Upon
dissolution under this section, a trust company shall surrender its
trust company charter to the commissioner and shall not have authority
to transact business as a state bank or to engage in trust business in
this state. Dissolution of a trust company may be accomplished by the
liquidation of the trust company or by reorganizing the trust company
into an entity that does not have authority to transact business as a
state bank or conduct trust business in this state.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:10-1002

 **383-C:10-1002 Voluntary Dissolution by Liquidation. –** A trust
company that voluntarily dissolves by means of liquidation shall comply
with the procedures for a voluntary dissolution set forth in the
applicable the Organizational Acts, but any filing required by
applicable law to be submitted to the secretary of state instead shall
be submitted to the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:10-1003

 **383-C:10-1003 Voluntary Dissolution by Reorganization. –** A trust
company that voluntarily dissolves by means of a reorganization into an
entity that is not authorized to engage in trust business shall be
subject to the provisions of this article and the procedures for a
reorganization into the type of entity as set forth in the provisions of
state and foreign law applicable to that type of entity. Any filing
required by applicable law of this state to be submitted to the
secretary of state shall first be submitted to the commissioner under
this article.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:10-1004

 **383-C:10-1004 Dissolution Notice. –** A trust company seeking to
dissolve its charter shall file a dissolution notice with the
commissioner under RSA 383-A:6-602 and this section. The dissolution
notice shall include a comprehensive plan of dissolution setting forth
the proposed disposition of all assets and liabilities in reasonable
detail to effect the liquidation or reorganization. Among other things,
the plan of dissolution shall provide for the discharge or assumption of
all of the trust company's known or unknown claims and liabilities and
the transfer of all of its responsibilities as a trustee or other
fiduciary to a successor trustee or trustees or other fiduciaries.
Additionally, the dissolving trust company shall provide to the
commissioner such other certifications, affidavits, documents, or
information with respect to the dissolution as the commissioner may
require to understand how assets and liabilities will be disposed of,
the timetable for effecting disposition of trust company assets and
liabilities, and the dissolving trust company's proposal for dealing
with any claims that are asserted after the dissolution has been
completed.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:10-1005

 **383-C:10-1005 Commissioner Determination. –** After receipt of a
notice of trust company dissolution under RSA 383-C:10-1004, the
commissioner shall make a determination under RSA 383-A:6-604.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:10-1006

 **383-C:10-1006 Completion of Plan of Dissolution. –** Upon issuance
by the commissioner of a no-objection letter or a determination of
approval in response to a dissolution notice under RSA 383-C:10-1004,
the trust company may dissolve in accordance with the terms of its
dissolution notice and plan for dissolution. Upon completion of all
actions required under the plan for dissolution and any conditions
prescribed by the commissioner, the dissolving trust company shall
submit a report of its actions to the commissioner and the dissolving
trust company's board of directors shall certify, under oath, that it is
true and correct. Following receipt of the report, the commissioner may
examine the trust company to determine whether the commissioner is
satisfied that all required actions have been taken to liquidate or
reorganize the trust company in accordance with the plan for dissolution
and any conditions prescribed. Following receipt of the dissolving trust
company's report and after determining that the plan for dissolution and
any conditions prescribed have been satisfied, the commissioner shall
notify the dissolving trust that the dissolution has been completed and
is final, which notice shall supplement the prior no-objection or
approval of dissolution issued by the commissioner under RSA
383-A:6-604. Thereupon, the dissolving trust company shall surrender its
charter to the commissioner, and the commissioner shall issue a
certificate of dissolution to be filed with the secretary of state. If
the commissioner is not satisfied that all required actions have been
taken, then the commissioner shall notify the dissolving trust company
what additional actions shall be taken to be eligible for a certificate
of dissolution, which notice shall supplement the prior no-objection or
approval of dissolution issued by the commissioner under RSA
383-A:6-604. In the notice, the commissioner may establish a deadline
for the submission of evidence that the additional actions have been
taken. The commissioner may extend the deadline for good cause shown. If
the applicant fails to file a supplemental report showing that the
additional actions have been taken before the deadline, or submits a
report that is found not to be satisfactory by the commissioner, then
the commissioner may issue an order under RSA 383-A:6-604 denying the
dissolution and reversing any prior approval or no-objection.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:10-1007

 **383-C:10-1007 Procedure; Effect; Recording Fee. –** After the
commissioner issues a certificate of dissolution under RSA
383-C:10-1006, the applicant shall file with the secretary of state the
certificate of dissolution and shall pay to the secretary of state any
filing a fee required by the applicable Organizations Act. In the case
of a reorganization, the applicant shall also file with the secretary of
state the documents that, under the applicable Organization Act, are
required to complete the statutory reorganization as approved by the
commissioner, including the organizational documents for the reorganized
entity. The secretary of state shall record the certificate and other
documents, if any, and, consistent with its practice and applicable law,
the secretary of state may issue a certificate evidencing the
liquidation or reorganization. Upon acceptance by the secretary of state
of the filing of a certificate of dissolution issued under RSA
383-C:10-1006, and the issuance of any certificate or acknowledgment by
the secretary of state, the dissolving trust company shall be deemed to
have been voluntarily dissolved or reorganized, as applicable, with the
same effect as if the voluntary dissolution or reorganization had been
effected by an entity subject to the applicable Organizational Act.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 11
                                             
Foreign Trust Companies
-----------------------

### Section 383-C:11-1101

 **383-C:11-1101 Engagement in Trust Business. –** (a) A foreign
trust company may engage in trust business in this state.
                                             
 (b) A foreign trust company that engages in trust business in this
state is subject to RSA 383-A and this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:11-1102

 **383-C:11-1102 Trust Office. –** (a) Before opening or relocating a
trust office within this state, a foreign trust company shall submit
notice to the commissioner describing the opening or relocation under
RSA 383-A:6-602. A foreign trust company may only proceed with the
opening or relocation of a trust office if permitted to do so by the
commissioner under RSA 383-A:6-604.
                                             
 (b) At least 10 days before closing a trust office within this
state, a foreign trust company shall provide notice of the closure to
the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:11-1103

 **383-C:11-1103 Examination. –** (a) The commissioner may examine a
foreign trust company's trust offices either on-site or off-site for
purposes of confirming the foreign trust company's safety and soundness,
including its compliance with applicable laws.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner may enter into a cooperative or
information-sharing agreement with any regulatory authority having
jurisdiction with respect to the periodic examination or other
supervision of any foreign trust company. In lieu of conducting an
examination, the commissioner may accept that agency's or organization's
report of examination or investigation.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:11-1104

 **383-C:11-1104 Filings With the Secretary of State. –** (a) A
foreign trust company shall file with the commissioner (i) a true and
complete copy of each document that the foreign trust company submits
for filing with this state's secretary of state, and (ii) a copy of any
notice or other document that the foreign trust company receives from
this state's secretary of state.
                                             
 (b) A foreign trust company organized as a corporation that
domesticates in this state under RSA 383-C:11-1105 is exempt from filing
annual report under the Corporation Act. A foreign trust company
organized as a limited liability company that domesticates in this state
under RSA 383-C:11-1105 is exempt from filing annual reports under the
LLC Act.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:11-1105

 **383-C:11-1105 Domestication. –** (a) With the commissioner's prior
approval, a foreign trust company organized as a corporation or a
limited liability company may become a trust company through
domestication in accordance with the applicable Organization Act and
this section.
                                             
 (b) A foreign trust company that proposes to domesticate shall file
with the commissioner an application for a charter under RSA 383-A:3-305
and this section. The application shall include all documents required
to be submitted under RSA 383-A:3-305, except that, instead of
submitting organizational documents, the foreign trust company shall
submit domestication documents, in accordance with the applicable
Organizations Act and a plan of domestication.
                                             
 (c) After receipt of a complete application for state charter under
RSA 383-C:11-1105(b), and consistent with RSA 383-A:3-305(b), the
commissioner may conduct an investigation under RSA 383-A:3-306 and may
conduct a hearing under RSA 383-A:3-307. The commissioner shall take
action on the application under RSA 383-A:3-308, subject to any
conditions that he or she may impose with respect to the domestication,
including establishing a date by which the domestication must be
completed. In all domestication proceedings under this article, the
foreign trust company shall act as organizer of the trust company
subject to domestication for purposes of article 3 of RSA 383-A. Upon
the foreign trust company's request, the commissioner subsequently may
extend the domestication completion date.
                                             
 (d) If the commissioner approves a foreign trust company's
application for a state charter under RSA 383-A:3-308(a), then the
foreign trust company shall file with the secretary of state the charter
bearing the commissioner's endorsement. The secretary of state, upon
payment of a fee equal to the fee charged by the secretary of state to
entities domesticating under the applicable Organizations Act, shall
cause the charter to be recorded.
                                             
 (e) Upon the secretary of state accepting the domestication filing,
the secretary of state shall issue a certificate to the domesticated
trust company as provided in RSA 383-A:3-310.
                                             
 (f) A foreign trust company becomes a trust company authorized to
transact trust business when the domestication is effective under the
applicable Organizations Act and this chapter, consistent with any
determination by the commissioner.
                                             
 (g) A trust company chartered in this state may domesticate as a
foreign trust company and transact trust business in another
jurisdiction in accordance with the applicable laws of the other
jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 12
                                             
Qualified Trust Advisors
------------------------

### Section 383-C:12-1201

 **383-C:12-1201 Definitions. –** For purposes of this article, the
following definitions shall apply:
                                             
 (a) "Limited-scope discretionary power'' means discretionary power
with respect to a trust if: (i) the terms of the trust confer
simultaneous, discretionary authority on two or more persons; (ii) the
power represents only a portion of the full range of discretionary
powers conferred by the terms of the trust instrument on all persons
that can exercise discretionary powers under the terms of the trust; and
(iii) the power generally is directed toward a singular area of
discretion. Limited-scope discretionary power may be any one of the
following powers, but generally would not include more than one of the
following: the power to make or direct discretionary distributions, the
power to decant, the power to add or remove beneficiaries, the power to
veto decisions by another fiduciary.
                                             
 (b) "Qualified trust advisor'' means (i) any person that serves as a
trust advisor or as a trust protector and, in that capacity, exercises
only limited-scope discretionary power as to a trust, and (ii) any other
person designated as a qualified trust advisor pursuant to rules adopted
by the commissioner under this article.
                                             
 (c) "Registered advisor'' means an entity that is (i) an investment
advisor or broker-dealer that maintains a valid registration under state
or federal law or (ii) a commodity trading advisor registered under
federal law.
                                             
 (d) "Trust advisor'' means a trust advisor as defined in RSA
564-B:1-103(27).
                                             
 (e) "Trust protector'' means a trust protector as defined in RSA
564-B:1-103(28).

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-C:12-1202

 **383-C:12-1202 Qualified Trust Advisor Powers. –** (a) A qualified
trust advisor that acts as a trust advisor or trust protector in this
state, either by acting in such capacity from an office in this state or
by acting in such capacity for a trust administered in this state, is
not a bank and shall not be required to obtain a charter as a bank, so
long as the qualified trust advisor exercises only limited-scope
discretionary power as to each trust the qualified trust advisor serves
as trust advisor or trust protector.
                                             
 (b) Except as provided under this article, a qualified trust advisor
shall not engage in trust business or banking business. Before engaging
in any banking business or trust business that is not permitted under
this article, a qualified trust advisor shall obtain a charter as a
bank.
                                             
 (c) Nothing in this article shall limit a registered advisor from
serving as trust advisor or trust protector in this state.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.
