---
title: 'CHAPTER 383-D FAMILY TRUST COMPANY ACT'
---

TITLE XXXV
                                             
BANKS AND BANKING; LOAN ASSOCIATIONS; CREDIT UNIONS
===================================================

CHAPTER 383-D
                                             
FAMILY TRUST COMPANY ACT
------------------------

Article 1
                                             
General Provisions
------------------

### Section 383-D:1-101

 **383-D:1-101 Short Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may
be cited as the "Family Trust Company Act.''

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:1-102

 **383-D:1-102 Scope. –** This chapter applies to family trust
companies. A family trust company is a state bank and also is a trust
company. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, RSA 383-A and RSA
383-C apply to family trust companies.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:1-103

 **383-D:1-103 Reservation of Power to Amend or Repeal. –** The
general court has power to amend or repeal all or part of this chapter
at any time, and all persons subject to this chapter are governed by the
amendment or repeal.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:1-104

 **383-D:1-104 Commissioner. –** The commissioner shall have the
powers necessary or incidental to performing all of the commissioner's
duties under this chapter, including the power to adopt rules as
provided in this chapter in accordance with RSA 541-A. All rules
previously adopted by the commissioner relating to the subject matter of
this chapter shall be subject to RSA 541-A:17.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:1-105

 **383-D:1-105 Confidential Information. –** (a) Except to the extent
that disclosure of confidential information is permissible under RSA
383:10-b, RSA 383-A:3-305(f), or RSA 383-A:5-511(c), family trust
company information is confidential, is not subject to subpoena, and is
not subject to public disclosure.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this section, "family trust company
information'' includes the following information:
                                             
 (1) Any of its information that is confidential under RSA
383:10-b or RSA 383-A:5-511(c);
                                             
 (2) The name, date of birth, and any other identifying
information of the designated relative;
                                             
 (3) The names, addresses, and equity interests of the family
trust company's equity owners;
                                             
 (4) Capital contributions to the family trust company;
                                             
 (5) The family trust company's directors and officers;
                                             
 (6) The addresses of the family trust company's offices;
                                             
 (7) The names and addresses of the family trust company's
affiliates;
                                             
 (8) The family trust company's business affiliations;
                                             
 (9) Any information that the family trust company provides to the
commissioner (whether in an application, in a report, in the course of
an examination, or otherwise);
                                             
 (10) Any information that the commissioner obtains in the course
of an examination;
                                             
 (11) An examination report;
                                             
 (12) Any person's nonpublic personal financial information as
defined in 15 U.S.C. section 6809(4);
                                             
 (13) Any information relating to any conversion, combination,
reorganization, domestication, or dissolution of a family trust company;
and
                                             
 (14) Any information relating to any transfer of an equity
interest in a family trust company.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 2
                                             
Definitions
-----------

### Section 383-D:2-201

 **383-D:2-201 Definitions. –** (a) Except as provided in subsection
(b), each term defined under RSA 383-A and RSA 383-C shall have the same
meaning for purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply:
                                             
 (1) "Affiliate'' means an entity that controls, is controlled by,
or is under common control with another entity.
                                             
 (2) "Designated relative'' means the individual who is designated
as the designated relative in the application under RSA 383-D:5-502 or
the application for change of designated relative under RSA
383-D:10-1002.
                                             
 (3) "Eligible trust'' means:
                                             
 (A) A trust of which each settlor is a family member;
                                             
 (B) A trust of which a settlor is a person other than a family
member if noncharitable beneficiaries who are family members represent a
majority of interest in the trust;
                                             
 (C) A trust of which a settlor is a person other than a family
member if a majority of the trust's noncharitable qualified
beneficiaries are family members;
                                             
 (D) A trust in which one or more eligible trusts or other
family clients are the only persons who currently are distributees or
permissible distributees of trust income or principal; or
                                             
 (E) A trust of which the settlor is one or more of (i) a key
employee, (ii) a former key employee, or (iii) a spouse of a key
employee or former key employee.
                                             
 (4) "Family charitable organization'' means a nonprofit
corporation, charitable trust, or other nonprofit or charitable entity
if (i) it was created by a family client or (ii) one or more family
clients contributed all or substantially all of the money or other
property that the entity has received as contributions. For purposes of
this subsection, a nonprofit corporation includes any voluntary
corporation incorporated under RSA 292. For purposes of this subsection,
a charitable entity includes an entity organized for any charitable,
educational, or religious purpose or any exempt purpose under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
                                             
 (5) "Family client'' means any of the following persons:
                                             
 (A) A family member;
                                             
 (B) A former family member;
                                             
 (C) A key employee;
                                             
 (D) A former key employee;
                                             
 (E) An estate of any incompetent or deceased family member,
former family member, key employee, or former key employee;
                                             
 (F) An eligible trust;
                                             
 (G) A family charitable organization;
                                             
 (H) A family entity;
                                             
 (I) A person designated as a family client under RSA
383-D:4-401(a); or
                                             
 (J) A person who qualifies as a family client under RSA
383-D:4-401(b).
                                             
 (6) "Family entity'' means an entity controlled by one or more
family clients other than key employees and former key employees.
                                             
 (7) "Family member'' is defined in RSA 383-D:4-402.
                                             
 (8) "Former family member'' means (i) a spouse or stepchild who
was a family member but ceased to qualify as a family member as the
result of a divorce, death, or any other reason or (ii) an individual
who was a family member but ceased to qualify as a family member as the
result of his or her adoption by an individual who is not a family
member.
                                             
 (9) "Former key employee'' means any of the following
individuals:
                                             
 (A) An individual who, under subsection (b)(10)(A) or
(b)(10)(B), was a key employee but ceased to qualify as a key employee
as the result of a change of duties, termination of employment, or any
other reason; or
                                             
 (B) The spouse of an individual described in subsection
(b)(9)(A).
                                             
 (10) "Key employee'' means any of the following individuals:
                                             
 (A) An individual who is a director or executive officer, or
employee of a family trust company or its affiliate and, in connection
with his or her regular functions or duties, participates in trust
services or the entity's management;
                                             
 (B) An individual who is a director, officer, or employee of
an eligible trust, a family entity, or family charitable organization
and, in connection with his or her regular functions or duties,
participates in the entity's management;
                                             
 (C) An individual designated as a key employee under RSA
383-D:4-403(b); or
                                             
 (D) The spouse of an individual described in subsection
(b)(10)(A), (b)(10)(B), or (b)(10)(C).
                                             
 (11) "Qualified beneficiary'' means qualified beneficiary as
defined in RSA 564-B:1-103(12).
                                             
 (12) "Required capital'' means the amount of capital that a
family trust company is required to maintain under RSA 383-D:6-602.
                                             
 (13) "Settlor'' means settlor as defined in RSA 564-B:1-103(15).
                                             
 (14) "Terms of a trust'' means terms of a trust as defined in RSA
564-B:1-103(19).
                                             
 (15) "Transact business with the general public'' means engaging
in any solicitation, agreement, or transaction to exercise trust powers
or otherwise provide trust, investment, or other services (whether or
not for a fee) to any person other than a family client.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015. 2016, 230:13, eff. Aug. 8,
2016.

Article 3
                                             
Qualifications; Safety and Soundness
------------------------------------

### Section 383-D:3-301

 **383-D:3-301 Qualifications. –** A family trust company shall
provide trust, investment, and other services only to family clients. A
family trust company's organizational documents shall prohibit the
family trust company from transacting business with the general public.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:3-302

 **383-D:3-302 Safety and Soundness. –** For purposes of determining
the safety or soundness of a family trust company or any act that a
family trust company has taken or proposes to take, the commissioner
shall consider the factors described in RSA 383-C:4-401. For purposes of
those factors, a family trust company's market is serving family
clients, and a family trust company's financial success is determined by
the avoidance of net losses over multiple years.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 4
                                             
Family Clients
--------------

### Section 383-D:4-401

 **383-D:4-401 Family Client. –** (a) With the commissioner's prior
approval, a family trust company may designate a person as a family
client if that person has a close and continuous relationship with one
or more family clients.
                                             
 (b) A person is a family client for one year after an involuntary
event that otherwise would cause the person to cease to qualify as a
family client. If, as the result of an involuntary event, a person
becomes a client of the family trust company but does not otherwise
qualify as a family client, then the person is a family client for one
year after the involuntary event. For purposes of this subsection, an
involuntary event means an event that is not within the reasonable
control of the family trust company or a family client, including the
divorce or death of a family member, a former family member, a key
employee, or former key employee. The revocation of an individual's
designation as a key employee under RSA 383-D:4-403(b) is not an
involuntary event.
                                             
 (c) If a person who, immediately before a change of the designated
relative as provided in RSA 383-D:10-1002 or a change of the method of
determining family members as provided in RSA 383-D:10-1003, was a
family client and a client of the family trust company, then that person
is a family client for one year after the effective date of the change.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:4-402

 **383-D:4-402 Family Member. –** (a) Subject to subsections (a) and
(b), "family member'' means any of the following individuals:
                                             
 (1) The designated relative;
                                             
 (2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), an individual
who is within (i) the fifth degree of lineal kinship to the designated
relative or (ii) the ninth degree of collateral kinship to the
designated relative; or
                                             
 (3) A spouse or former spouse of an individual described in
subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2).
                                             
 (b) In lieu of the method for determining family members under
subsection (a)(2), a family trust company may elect to treat as a family
member any individual who is the designated relative's lineal descendant
and is not more than 10 generations removed from the designated
relative. A family trust company that wishes to use this alternate
method shall make the election on its application under RSA 383-D:5-502
or file with the commissioner a notice in accordance with RSA
383-D:10-1003.
                                             
 (c) For purposes of subsections (a)(2) and (b), a family member's
child includes the family member's adopted child, stepchild, or foster
child or an individual who was a minor when the family member became
that individual's guardian.
                                             
 (d) For purposes of this section, "lineal kinship'' means a family
member who is in the direct line of ascent or descent from the
designated relative, and "collateral kinship'' means a relationship that
is not lineal, but stems from a common ancestor. Degrees are calculated
by adding the number of steps from the designated relative through each
person to the family member either directly in the case of lineal
kinship or through the common ancestor in the case of collateral
kinship.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:4-403

 **383-D:4-403 Key Employee. –** (a) For purposes of RSA
383-D:2-201(b)(10)(A), an individual who solely performs clerical,
secretarial, or administrative functions for the family trust company,
eligible trust, family entity, or family charitable organization does
not participate in trust services or the entity's management.
                                             
 (b) In addition to any individual who is a key employee under RSA
383-D:2-201(b)(10)(A) or (B), a family trust company may designate as a
key employee an individual who is a current or former employee of the
family trust company, an eligible trust, a family entity, or a family
charitable organization. A family trust company may revoke any
designation of an individual as a key employee. At any time, the number
of individuals designated as key employees under this subsection shall
not exceed 35.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015. 2016, 230:4, eff. Aug. 8,
2016.

### Section 383-D:4-404

 **383-D:4-404 Former Key Employee. –** (a) After an individual
becomes a former key employee, that individual does not qualify as a
former key employee with respect to any new trust, investment, or other
service, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b).
                                             
 (b) An individual is a former key employee only to the extent of (i)
trust, investment, or other services that the family trust company was
providing to that individual (or an eligible trust of which the
individual or the individual's spouse was a settlor) immediately before
the individual became a former key employee and (ii) any trust,
investment, or other service in connection with any additional
investments that, with respect to an investment that the family trust
company advises or manages, the individual (or an eligible trust of
which the individual or the individual's spouse was a settlor) was
contractually obligated to make before the individual became a former
key employee.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:4-405

 **383-D:4-405 Eligible Trust. –** A trust is not an eligible trust
if the commissioner determines that the trust was formed or is
administered for the primary purpose of evading the limitations of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:4-406

 **383-D:4-406 Family Entity. –** An entity is not a family client if
the commissioner determines that the entity was organized or is operated
for the primary purpose of evading the limitations of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:4-407

 **383-D:4-407 Family Charitable Organization. –** A charitable
organization is not a family client if the commissioner determines that
it was organized or is operated for the primary purpose of evading the
limitations of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 5
                                             
Organization and Conversion
---------------------------

### Section 383-D:5-501

 **383-D:5-501 General. –** Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, a family trust company shall be organized in accordance with
RSA 383-A.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:5-502

 **383-D:5-502 Application. –** In addition to any other information
that the application may or must contain under RSA 383-A:3-305, the
application shall include (i) the designated relative's name and date of
birth and (ii) any request for exemption under RSA 383-D:7-702. For
purposes of determining family members, the application may include an
election to use the alternate method described in RSA 383-D:4-402(b).
Unless the application includes that election or the family trust
company elects the alternate method in accordance with RSA
383-D:10-1003, the method described in RSA 383-D:4-402(a) shall apply.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:5-503

 **383-D:5-503 Review of Application. –** (a) In considering whether
to approve or deny an application for a family trust company charter,
the commissioner shall consider the trust company's safety and soundness
in accordance with RSA 383-D:3-302.
                                             
 (b) During the course of his or her review of an application, the
commissioner may propose that the organizer amend or supplement the
application for purposes of ensuring that the family trust company meets
the requirements of a family trust company under this chapter, RSA
383-A, and RSA 383-C and ensuring the family trust company's safety and
soundness. The organizer may amend or supplement the application in
accordance with the commissioner's proposal.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:5-504

 **383-D:5-504 Exemptions From Public Notice and Hearing. –** (a) The
organizer of a family trust company is exempt from publishing any notice
of their application for a family trust company charter. RSA
383-A:3-305(b)(2) shall not apply to the organizer of a family trust
company.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall not order a hearing in connection with
any application for a family trust company charter. RSA 383-A:3-307
shall not apply to the organizer of a family trust company.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:5-505

 **383-D:5-505 Action on Application. –** Upon the completion of his
or her review of the application, the commissioner shall issue a notice
of decision and a charter in accordance with RSA 383-A:3-308(a) or a
notice of denial in accordance with RSA 383-A:3-308(b). If the
commissioner approves the application, then, in addition to the
information that the notice must include under RSA 383-A:3-308(a), the
notice of decision shall include a statement specifying each exemption
granted or denied.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:5-506

 **383-D:5-506 Conversion Into a Trust Company. –** A family trust
company may apply to convert to a trust company that is authorized to
transact business with the general public by filing an application for a
trust company charter in accordance with article 3 of RSA 383-A. RSA
383-A and RSA 383-C shall govern the application, and this chapter shall
not apply to the application. The conversion shall be effective upon the
issuance of a certificate authority granting the entity the authority to
transact trust business, including transacting business with the general
public. Upon the conversion's effective date, the entity shall cease to
be a family trust company, and any exemptions granted under this chapter
shall terminate.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 6
                                             
Capital and Insurance
---------------------

### Section 383-D:6-601

 **383-D:6-601 General. –** A family trust company shall maintain the
required capital under RSA 383-D:6-602 and an errors and omissions
liability insurance policy under RSA 383-A:4-406. For purposes of
determining the appropriate amounts of required capital and liability
insurance, the commissioner shall consider the family trust company's
safety and soundness and shall give primary consideration to the
liability insurance, which provide the primary protections for a family
trust company's family clients. RSA 383-C:5-501 shall not apply to
family trust companies.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:6-602

 **383-D:6-602 Required Capital. –** (a) The minimum required capital
of a family trust company is 
                                             $250,000. The commissioner may require a
family trust company to maintain additional capital. From time to time,
the commissioner may reduce or increase the amount of additional capital
that a family trust company is required to maintain.
                                             
 (b) After it obtains the authority to exercise trust powers, a
family trust company shall maintain an amount of capital that equals or
exceeds the required capital. A family trust company shall not make any
distribution to the extent that, upon making the distribution, the
family trust company's total capital would be less than the required
capital. For purposes of this subsection, "distribution'' means a direct
or indirect transfer of money or other property (except an equity
interest in the family trust company) to or for the benefit of family
trust company's equity owners in respect of any of equity interests in
the family trust company.
                                             
 (c) RSA 383-C:5-502(a) and (b) shall not apply to family trust
companies.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:6-603

 **383-D:6-603 Liquidation Pledge. –** A family trust company is
exempt from RSA 383-C:5-503.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 7
                                             
Powers and Exemptions
---------------------

### Section 383-D:7-701

 **383-D:7-701 Powers. –** A family trust company shall have the
powers granted to a trust company under RSA 383-C, excluding the power
to transact business with the general public. A family trust company
shall not transact business with the general public.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:7-702

 **383-D:7-702 Grant of Exemptions. –** (a) Subject to subsection
(b), the commissioner may exempt a family trust company from any one or
more requirements of RSA 383-A, RSA 383-C, and this chapter.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall not have the power to exempt a family
trust company from any of the following requirements:
                                             
 (1) the qualifications of a family trust company under RSA
383-D:3-301;
                                             
 (2) the requirements for organization under article 5 of this
chapter;
                                             
 (3) the requirement to maintain capital that equals or exceeds
the minimum required capital under RSA 383-D:6-602;
                                             
 (4) the requirement to maintain an errors and omissions liability
insurance policy under RSA 383-A:4-406; and
                                             
 (5) the prohibition against accepting deposits under RSA
383-C:3-302.
                                             
 (c) In the application under RSA 383-D:5-502, a family trust
company's organizer may request one or more exemptions. After obtaining
its certificate of authority to exercise trust powers, a family trust
company may request one or more exemptions by filing with the
commissioner an application for exemption.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner may grant or deny, in whole or in part, any
requested exemption, and the commissioner may impose one or more
reasonable conditions or limitations on any exemption that the
commissioner grants.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:7-703

 **383-D:7-703 Modification or Revocation of Exemptions. –** The
commissioner may modify or revoke any exemption granted to a family
trust company under RSA 383-D:7-702 if (i) the commissioner determines
that, based upon the safety and soundness of the family trust company or
any action that the family trust company has taken or proposes to take,
modification or revocation is necessary or advisable or (ii) the family
trust company fails to comply with this chapter or any other applicable
laws. A modification of an exemption includes the imposition of one or
more reasonable conditions or limitations on that exemption.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 8
                                             
Directors and Officers
----------------------

### Section 383-D:8-801

 **383-D:8-801 Board of Directors. –** (a) A family trust company
shall have a board of directors, and that board of directors must have
not less than three members. A director need not be a resident of New
Hampshire or a citizen of the United States, unless otherwise required
by the commissioner in consideration of the family trust company's
safety and soundness. RSA 383-C:6-601 shall not apply to family trust
companies.
                                             
 (b) Subject to any limitations set forth in its organizational
documents, this chapter, and RSA 383-C, all of the family trust
company's powers shall be exercised by or under the authority of the
family trust company's board of directors.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:8-802

 **383-D:8-802 Standard of Care. –** (a) Except as provided in
subsections (b) and (c), RSA 383-A:5-505 applies to a director or
officer of a family trust company.
                                             
 (b) A director or officer of a family trust company shall not be
personally liable to any person to the extent that, in the performance
of his or her duties, the director or officer acts in good faith. In
connection with any matter involving a trust, a director or officer acts
in good faith to the extent that he or she acts in reasonable reliance
on the terms of the trust, a nonjudicial settlement agreement under RSA
564-B:1-111, or a court order.
                                             
 (c) A family trust company may indemnify a director or officer
against any liability, except to the extent that a court determines that
the director or officer failed to act in good faith.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 9
                                             
Trust Offices
-------------

### Section 383-D:9-901

 **383-D:9-901 Trust Offices. –** In accordance with RSA 383-C:7-701
through RSA 383-C:7-703, a family trust company may open, close, or
relocate any trust office at which it exercises trust powers or
otherwise transacts business.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 10
                                             
Reports, Certifications, and Other Filings
------------------------------------------

### Section 383-D:10-1001

 **383-D:10-1001 Reports and Certification. –** (a) In addition to
filing an annual report in accordance with RSA 383-A:5-511, a family
trust company shall file with the commissioner an annual certification
certifying that the family trust company is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the conditions and limitations of all
granted exemptions. In its annual certification, a family trust company
may change its designated relative in accordance with RSA 383-D:10-1002.
The annual certification is due on the same day as its annual report.
                                             
 (b) A family trust company shall file quarterly reports in
accordance with RSA 383-A:5-510, and it shall file copies of other
documents as required under RSA 383-A:5-511.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:10-1002

 **383-D:10-1002 Change of Designated Relative. –** (a) A family
trust company may change its designated relative by filing with the
commissioner notice in which the family trust company designates a new
designated relative.
                                             
 (b) Except with the commissioner's prior approval, a family trust
company cannot change its designated relative more than once every 10
years after the issuance of its certificate of authority.
                                             
 (c) Except with the commissioner's prior approval, the change of a
family trust company's designated relative is effective on January 1 of
the year after in which the family trust company files its notice with
the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:10-1003

 **383-D:10-1003 Change of Method of Determining Family Members. –**
(a) For purposes of determining family members, a family trust company
may elect to use the method described in RSA 383-D:4-402(a) or the
alternate method described in RSA 383-D:4-402(b). The family trust
company may change its election by filing with the commissioner a notice
of the change.
                                             
 (b) Except with the commissioner's prior approval, a family trust
company cannot change its election more than once every 10 years after
the issuance of its certificate of authority.
                                             
 (c) Except with the commissioner's prior approval, the new method is
effective on January 1 of the year after which the family trust company
files its notice with the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:10-1004

 **383-D:10-1004 Exemption From Public Hearings. –** In connection
with any matter subject to the procedural rules under article 6 of RSA
383-A, the commissioner shall not order a public hearing. To the extent
that RSA 383-A:6-604 authorizes the commissioner to hold a public
hearing, RSA 383-A:6-604 shall not apply to a family trust company.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 11
                                             
Examinations
------------

### Section 383-D:11-1101

 **383-D:11-1101 Examination. –** Except as provided in RSA
383-D:11-1102, the commissioner shall examine a family trust company in
accordance with RSA 383:13 and RSA 383-C:7-704.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:11-1102

 **383-D:11-1102 Audits in Lieu of Examination. –** (a) In lieu of an
examination, the commissioner may accept (i) a financial audit report
made in accordance with RSA 383-A:5-510 and (ii) a fiduciary compliance
audit report that includes a review of each material aspect of the
family trust company's management, operations, compliance, and asset
management and conforms to applicable generally accepted auditing
standards.
                                             
 (b) A family trust company may apply for an exemption from regular
examination under RSA 383:13. In determining whether to grant an
exemption, the commissioner shall consider (i) the quality of the family
trust company's management, operations, compliance, and asset management
as determined under any prior examinations and reports described in
subsection (a), (ii) the quality, scope, and amount of coverage under
the errors and omissions liability insurance policy that the family
trust company maintains, and (iii) any other relevant factors affecting
the family trust company's safety and soundness. A family trust company
exempt from regular examination shall annually file the reports
described in subsection (a).
                                             
 (c) If the commissioner determines that a family trust company is or
may have engaged in any activity that adversely affects the family trust
company's safety and soundness, then the commissioner may examine the
family trust company and may revoke any exemption under subsection (b).

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 12
                                             
Dissolution
-----------

### Section 383-D:12-1201

 **383-D:12-1201 Voluntary Dissolution. –** A family trust company
may voluntarily dissolve in accordance with RSA 383-C:10-1001 through
RSA 383-C:10-1007.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:12-1202

 **383-D:12-1202 Revocation of Authority to Conduct Trust Business.
–** (a) If the commissioner determines that a family trust company is or
has engaged in any activity that jeopardizes its safety or soundness,
then the commissioner may revoke the family trust company's authority to
conduct trust business.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall issue a notice to the family trust
company following the revocation of its authority granting it an
opportunity for a hearing in accordance with RSA 541-A. The family trust
company may appeal the commissioner's decision under RSA 541.
                                             
 (c) The revocation of a family trust company's authority to conduct
trust business removes the family trust company as a trustee, trust
advisor, or trust protector of each trust of which it is serving as a
trustee, trust advisor, or trust protector.
                                             
 (d) Within a reasonable time after the revocation of its authority
to conduct trust business, a family trust company shall dissolve in
accordance with its organizational documents.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:12-1203

 **383-D:12-1203 Judicial Dissolution. –** (a) The commissioner or
any interested person may commence a judicial proceeding for purposes of
seeking the dissolution of a family trust company. Each interested
person shall be a party to that judicial proceeding. For purposes of
this section, "interested person'' means a person who is (i) a
shareholder of a family trust company organized as a corporation, (ii) a
member of a family trust company organized as a limited liability
company, or (iii) a director or officer of the family trust company.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall have the right to intervene in a judicial
proceeding under this section. Unless the commissioner commences a
judicial proceeding under this section or exercises his or her right to
intervene, the commissioner shall not be a party to a judicial
proceeding under this section.
                                             
 (c) The probate division of the circuit court shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over any judicial proceeding under this section.
                                             
 (d) Venue for a judicial proceeding under this section is in the
county of this state in which the family trust company's principal
office is located or, if it does not have a principal office in this
state, its registered office.
                                             
 (e) The court may dissolve the family trust company if it is
established that:
                                             
 (1) The family trust company has materially violated any
applicable law, including the requirement to maintain its required
capital under RSA 383-C:5-502 or the requirement to maintain an errors
and omissions liability insurance policy under RSA 383-A:4-406;
                                             
 (2) The family trust company is or has engaged in any activity
that jeopardizes its safety or soundness;
                                             
 (3) The directors are deadlocked in the management of the family
trust company's affairs, the family trust company's equity owners are
unable to break the deadlock, and irreparable injury to the family trust
company or one or more of the family trust company's clients is
threatened or being suffered;
                                             
 (4) The directors, its executive officers, or those in control of
the family trust company have acted, are acting, or will act in a manner
that is illegal or fraudulent;
                                             
 (5) The family trust company's equity owners are deadlocked in
voting power and have failed, for a period that includes at least 2
consecutive annual meeting dates, to elect successors to directors whose
terms have expired;
                                             
 (6) The family trust company's assets are being misapplied or
wasted;
                                             
 (7) An agreement of all of the family trust company's equity
owners requires the dissolution and the family trust company has not
been dissolved in accordance with that agreement;
                                             
 (8) The family trust company's authority to conduct trust
business has terminated under RSA 383-D:12-1202 and the family trust
company has failed within a reasonable time to liquidate and distribute
its assets and dissolve; or
                                             
 (9) The family trust company has abandoned its business and has
failed within a reasonable time to liquidate and distribute its assets
and dissolve.
                                             
 (f) If, after a hearing, the court determines that one or more
grounds for judicial dissolution described under subsection (e) exist,
then it shall issue an order dissolving the family trust company,
specifying the effective date of the dissolution, and specifying the
effective date on which the family trust company's authority to conduct
trust business terminates. The clerk of the court shall deliver
certified copies of the order to the commissioner and the secretary of
state, and the clerk of the court shall mail notice of the order to the
department of revenue administration. The secretary of state shall file
the certified copy that he or she receives. After entering the order of
dissolution, the court shall direct the winding up and liquidation of
the family trust company's affairs in accordance with the Corporation
Act if the family trust company is organized as a corporation or the LLC
Act if the family trust company is organized as a limited liability
company.
                                             
 (g) In a judicial proceeding under this section, the court may order
any appropriate relief, including relief under RSA 547:3-b.
                                             
 (h) If the commissioner is a party in a judicial proceeding under
this section, then the court shall award the commissioner's costs and
expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, to be paid by the family
trust company or to the extent that the family trust company's assets
are insufficient, one or more of the family trust company's clients,
apportioned among them as justice and equity requires.
                                             
 (i) As justice and equity may require in a judicial proceeding under
this section, the court may award costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorney's fees, to any party, to be paid by (i) the family
trust company, (ii) to the extent that the family trust company's assets
are insufficient, one or more of the family trust company's clients, or
(iii) another party other than the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

Article 13
                                             
Foreign Family Trust Companies
------------------------------

### Section 383-D:13-1301

 **383-D:13-1301 Authority to Exercise Trust Powers. –** (a) A
foreign family trust company may engage in trust business in this state.
A foreign family trust company that exercises trust powers in this state
is subject to this chapter and, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, RSA 383-A and RSA 383-C. RSA 383-C:11-1101 shall not apply to
foreign family trust companies.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this chapter, "foreign family trust company''
means a foreign trust company that (i) is organized in a state or
jurisdiction other than New Hampshire and (ii) is authorized under the
laws of that state or jurisdiction to provide trust, investment, and
other services principally to members of one or two families and
entities in which one or more of those family members have substantial
interests. Under those laws, a trust company meeting those
qualifications commonly is called a family trust company or a private
trust company.
                                             
 (c) A foreign trust company is not a foreign family trust company if
the commissioner determines that the foreign trust company was organized
or is operated for the primary purpose of evading the limitations of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:13-1302

 **383-D:13-1302 Trust Offices. –** In accordance with RSA
383-C:11-1102, a foreign family trust company may open, close, or
relocate any trust office at which it exercises trust powers or
otherwise transacts business.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:13-1303

 **383-D:13-1303 Examination. –** The commissioner may examine a
foreign family trust company as provided in RSA 383-D:11-1101. RSA
383-C:11-1103 shall not apply to foreign family trust companies.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:13-1304

 **383-D:13-1304 Filings with the Secretary of State. –** A foreign
family trust company shall file with the commissioner (i) a true and
complete copy of each document that the foreign family trust company
submits for filing with the New Hampshire secretary of state and (ii) a
copy of any notice or other document that the foreign family trust
company receives from the New Hampshire secretary of state. RSA
383-C:11-1104 shall not apply to foreign family trust companies.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 383-D:13-1305

 **383-D:13-1305 Domestication. –** A foreign family trust company
may domesticate in accordance with RSA 383-C:11-1104 if, upon its
domestication, it will qualify as a family trust company under RSA
383-D:3-301.

**Source.** 2015, 272:16, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.
