---
title: CHAPTER 395 LIQUIDATION UNDER SUPERVISION OF THE BANK COMMISSIONER
---

TITLE XXXV
                                             
BANKS AND BANKING; LOAN ASSOCIATIONS; CREDIT UNIONS
===================================================

CHAPTER 395
                                             
LIQUIDATION UNDER SUPERVISION OF THE BANK COMMISSIONER
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 395:1

 **395:1 Petition. –** If any institution under the supervision of
the bank commissioner shall refuse to permit an examination of its
affairs by the commissioner, or to furnish the necessary facilities
therefor, or shall violate its charter or any law of the state after
having been notified in writing by the commissioner of such violation,
or if at any time it appears to the commissioner that its business is
being conducted in an unsafe or unauthorized manner, or that it is
necessary for the public safety that it should not continue to transact
business, the commissioner may represent the fact by petition to some
justice of the superior court.

**Source.** 1911, 68:2. 1915, 97:1. PL 268:1. RL 316:1.

### Section 395:2

 **395:2 Orders. –** The court may issue an injunction prohibiting,
as far as may be thought necessary, the transaction of any business of
said institution and the commissioner shall cause the same to be served.
Any justice of the superior court, upon petition and notice to the
commissioner, may dissolve, modify, continue or extend such injunction
as equity may require. If in the opinion of said justice the public good
requires he may direct the commissioner to take possession forthwith of
the property and business of such institution, and he may retain
possession thereof until it shall resume business, or until its affairs
shall finally be liquidated as herein provided; and upon completing such
liquidation the charter of such institution shall be vacated.

**Source.** 1911, 68:2. 1915, 97:1. PL 268:2. RL 316:2.

### Section 395:3

 **395:3 Resuming Business. –** Such institutions may, with the
consent of the commissioner, resume business upon such conditions as the
commissioner may approve.

**Source.** 1911, 68:3. PL 268:3. RL 316:3.

### Section 395:4

 **395:4 Insolvency. –** Whenever it appears to the commissioner that
any institution to which this chapter applies reflects negative equity
capital, as determined by the most recent report of examination
conducted by the banking department or a federal deposit insuring
agency, the commissioner may represent the facts by ex parte petition to
some justice of the superior court, or, at such time as the commissioner
receives notice from a federal deposit insuring agency that such agency
has commenced any proceeding to terminate the subject institution's
deposit insurance, the commissioner shall represent the facts by ex
parte petition to a justice of the superior court. In either such
circumstance, said justice shall direct the commissioner to take
possession of the property and business of such institution and retain
possession thereof until it shall resume business, or until its affairs
shall finally be liquidated as herein provided; and upon completion of
such liquidation the charter of such institution shall be vacated.

**Source.** 1911, 68:4. PL 268:4. RL 316:4. RSA 395:4. 1991, 251:3.
1992, 98:1, eff. April 29, 1992.

### Section 395:5

 **395:5 Commissioner's Duties. –** Upon taking possession of the
property and business of any institution to which this chapter applies,
the commissioner shall have authority to collect money due the
institution and to do such other acts as are necessary to conserve its
assets and business. He shall collect all debts due and claims belonging
to it, and, upon the order of the superior court, may sell or compound
all bad or doubtful debts; and on like order may sell all or any part of
the real and personal property of the institution on such terms as the
court shall direct.

**Source.** 1911, 68:5. PL 268:5. RL 316:5. RSA 395:5. 1967, 132:16,
eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 395:6

 **395:6 Inventory. –** The commissioner shall make an inventory of
the assets of the institution in duplicate, one to be filed in the
office of the commissioner, and one in the office of the clerk of the
superior court for the county in which the principal office of the
institution is located.

**Source.** 1911, 68:5. PL 268:6. RL 316:6.

### Section 395:7

 **395:7 Notice. –** The commissioner shall give notice of the fact
that he has taken possession of the property and business of the
institution to any and all banks, trust companies, associations and
individuals holding or having possession of any assets of such
institution.

**Source.** 1911, 68:5. PL 268:7. RL 316:7.

### Section 395:8

 **395:8 Effect. –** No bank, trust company, association or
individual, knowing that the commissioner has taken such possession, or
having been notified thereof as aforesaid, shall have a lien or charge
for any payment, advance or clearance thereafter made, or liability
thereafter incurred, against any of the assets of the institution.

**Source.** 1911, 68:5. PL 268:8. RL 316:8.

### Section 395:9

 **395:9 Commissioner's Authority. –** For the purpose of executing
and performing the powers and duties hereby conferred upon him, the
commissioner may, in the name of any such institution, prosecute and
defend any legal proceedings, and may in the name of the institution
execute, acknowledge and deliver any instruments necessary and proper to
effectuate any sale of real or personal property or any compromise
authorized by the court as herein provided; and any instrument executed
pursuant to such authority shall be valid and effectual for all purposes
to the same extent as though executed by the institution.

**Source.** 1911, 68:6. PL 268:9. RL 316:9.

### Section 395:10

 **395:10 Appointment of Agents. –** The commissioner may appoint
agents to assist him to perform such duties connected with the business
of such institutions as he may deem proper, and may procure such expert
assistance and advice, or retain such of the officers or employees of
such institution, as he may deem necessary; and the commissioner shall
require from such agents or assistants such security for the faithful
performance of their duty as he may deem proper.

**Source.** 1911, 68:7. PL 268:10. RL 316:10.

### Section 395:10-a

 **395:10-a Authority to Appoint a Federal Regulatory Agency as
Liquidating or Receiving Agent. –** Upon petition by the bank
commissioner for the state to the superior court, the court may
authorize the commissioner to appoint as liquidating or receiving agent
of the bank commissioner a federal agency having authority to act in
such capacity, subject to consent of such federal agency, allowing the
federal agency so appointed to take possession of the assets, both legal
and equitable, of a closed New Hampshire depository institution or any
institution with respect to which the commissioner has filed a petition
pursuant to RSA 395:4. As liquidating or receiving agent appointed by
the bank commissioner with the permission of the court, the federal
agency may assist the bank commissioner in the performance of his duties
pursuant to this chapter, completing the final liquidation of such
depository institution and vacation of its charter. The federal agency
so appointed shall not be subject to the requirements of RSA 395:5. Upon
such appointment, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the
Resolution Trust Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration
or any successor federal agency shall carry out its duties as receiver
or liquidator pursuant to the applicable provisions of federal law.

**Source.** 1973, 11:1. 1991, 251:1. 1992, 98:2, eff. April 29, 1992.

### Section 395:10-b

 **395:10-b Emergency Waiver. –** The bank commissioner, upon the
appointment of a federal agency as receiving or liquidating agent
pursuant to RSA 395:10-a, shall have authority to issue an order waiving
or suspending all laws, rules, practices and policies with respect to
the authorization to commence or continue banking operations in the
state of New Hampshire as he deems necessary and prudent. Such order
shall take effect upon the appointment of the federal agency and shall
continue in force until all actions necessary to liquidate the insolvent
or closed New Hampshire depository institution are completed. Any waiver
or suspension of any law, rule, practice or policy shall be limited to
matters pertaining to the legally insolvent or closed New Hampshire
depository institution for whom a liquidating or receiving agent has
been appointed.

**Source.** 1991, 251:2, eff. June 10, 1991.

### Section 395:11

 **395:11 No Extra Compensation to Commissioner. –** The commissioner
shall not receive any extra compensation for his services.

**Source.** 1911, 68:10. PL 268:11. RL 316:11.

### Section 395:12

 **395:12 Agent's Compensation, etc. –** The compensation of any
agents, counsel, employees and assistants, and all expenses of
supervision and liquidation, shall be fixed by the commissioner, subject
to the approval of the court, and on notice to such institution, and
upon the certificate of the commissioner, shall be paid out of the funds
of the institution in their hands.

**Source.** 1911, 68:10. PL 268:12. RL 316:12.

Allowance and Payment of Claims
-------------------------------

### Section 395:13

 **395:13 Notice. –** The commissioner shall cause to be published
weekly for 3 consecutive months, in such newspapers as he may direct, a
notice calling on all persons who may have claims against such
institution to present the same to the commissioner and to make legal
proof thereof at a place and time not earlier than the last day of
publication, to be therein specified. The commissioner shall mail a
similar notice to all persons whose names appear as creditors upon the
books of the institution so far as their addresses are known.

**Source.** 1911, 68:8. PL 268:13. RL 316:13.

### Section 395:14

 **395:14 Rejection. –** If the commissioner doubts the justice and
validity of any claim he may reject the same and serve notice of such
rejection upon the claimant either by mail or in person. An affidavit of
service of such notice, which shall be prima facie evidence thereof,
shall be filed with the commissioner.

**Source.** 1911, 68:8. PL 268:14. RL 316:14.

### Section 395:15

 **395:15 Suit. –** An action upon the claim so rejected shall not be
entertained unless brought within 6 months after such service.

**Source.** 1911, 68:8. PL 268:15. RL 316:15.

### Section 395:16

 **395:16 Delayed Claims. –** Claims presented after the expiration
of the time specified in the notice to creditors shall be entitled to
share in the distribution only to the extent of the assets in the hands
of the commissioner equitably applicable thereto.

**Source.** 1911, 68:8. PL 268:16. RL 316:16.

### Section 395:17

 **395:17 Reports on Claims. –** Upon the expiration of the time
fixed for the presentation of claims, the commissioner shall make in
duplicate a full and complete list of the claims presented, including
and specifying such claims as have been rejected by him. One of the said
lists shall be filed in the office of the commissioner, and the other in
the office of the clerk of court.

**Source.** 1911, 68:9. PL 268:17. RL 316:17.

### Section 395:18

 **395:18 Additional List. –** Thereafter the commissioner shall make
and file in said offices, at least 15 days before every application to
the court for leave to declare a dividend, a supplementary list of the
claims presented since the last preceding list was filed, including and
specifying such claims as have been rejected by him, and, in any event,
he shall make and file the said list at least once in every year after
the filing of the original list, so long as he shall remain in the
possession of the property and business of the institution. Said
inventory and lists shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times.

**Source.** 1911, 68:9. PL 268:18. RL 316:18.

### Section 395:19

 **395:19 Payment of Secured Claims and Dividends. –** At any time
after the expiration of the date fixed for the presentation of claims,
upon application of the commissioner, the court may authorize:
                                             
 I. Any person who holds a perfected security interest or a mortgage
lien in assets of the insolvent or closed New Hampshire depository
institution, which security interest or mortgage lien was granted to the
person by such institution pursuant to a written contract or agreement
as security for the payment of a debt or obligation deemed to be valid
by the commissioner to:
                                             
 (a) Dispose of or foreclose its mortgage lien on the collateral
pursuant to applicable law;
                                             
 (b) Satisfy such debt or obligation from the proceeds thereof;
                                             
 (c) Pay the balance of the proceeds, if any, to the commissioner;
and
                                             
 (d) Provide a full account to the commissioner for all actions
taken in connection with the disposition of or foreclosure of its
mortgage lien on the collateral; and
                                             
 II. The commissioner to declare out of the funds remaining in his
hands, one or more dividends, such dividends to be paid to such persons,
in such amounts, and upon such notice, as may be directed by the court.
All dividends payable under this paragraph shall be paid in accordance
with the priority established under RSA 395:30.

**Source.** 1911, 68:11. PL 268:19. RL 316:19. RSA 395:19. 1991, 251:4,
eff. June 10, 1991.

### Section 395:20

 **395:20 Payment of. –** In the absence of an express written
agreement to the contrary, any person paying to the depositor of a bank
closed or in liquidation under this chapter or in any manner, a part or
the whole of his deposit therein shall be subrogated to the rights of
such depositor to receive dividends on account of the amount so paid.

**Source.** 1937, 103:7. RL 316:20.

### Section 395:21

 **395:21 Objections to Claims. –** Objections to any claim not
rejected by the commissioner may be made by any person interested by
filing a copy of such objections with the commissioner, who shall
present the same to the court at the time of the next application for
permission to declare a dividend. The court to which such application is
made shall thereupon notify the claimant and determine the validity of
the claim. No dividend thereon shall be paid by the commissioner until
the claimant shall have established his claim by judgment of the court.

**Source.** 1911, 68:11. PL 268:20. RL 316:21.

### Section 395:22-25

 **395:22 to 395:25 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1965, 214:2, eff. Jan.
1, 1966.
                                             ]

Supervisory Power of Court
--------------------------

### Section 395:26

 **395:26 Procedure. –** Whenever any institution of whose property
and business the commissioner takes possession as aforesaid deems itself
aggrieved thereby, it may at any time within 10 days thereafter apply to
the court to discontinue further proceedings; and the court, after
notice to the commissioner and hearing, may dismiss such application or
direct the commissioner to surrender the said business and property to
the institution.

**Source.** 1911, 68:14. PL 268:25. RL 316:26.

Reduction of Deposits
---------------------

### Section 395:27

 **395:27 By Commissioner. –** Whenever it appears to the
commissioner advisable, or upon the petition of the trustees or
directors of the institution, he may, with the approval of a justice of
the superior court, reduce pro rata the deposit account of each
depositor therein, whenever the value of its assets is less than the
total amount of its deposits.

**Source.** 1911, 68:16. PL 268:26. RL 316:27.

### Section 395:28

 **395:28 Sharing Assets. –** If the bank shall realize from the
assets a greater sum than was so fixed upon the court shall order such
excess to be equitably divided among the depositors whose accounts have
been reduced, but to the extent of such reduction only.

**Source.** 1911, 68:16. PL 268:27. RL 316:28.

### Section 395:29

 **395:29 New Deposits. –** If any institution whose deposit accounts
have been reduced under the provisions of this chapter shall afterward
receive new deposits it shall keep its accounts, and in all respects
conduct its business relating to such new deposits, as if it were a
separate institution, distinct from the one in which the old deposits
were made; and if proceedings shall be commenced against such
institution to wind up its affairs the court may make the same
applicable to either or both parts of such business. Notice of such
proceedings shall be given by publication in one or more newspapers
published in the county where the institution is located.

**Source.** 1911, 68:17. PL 268:28. RL 316:29.

### Section 395:29-a

 **395:29-a Federal Approval. –** Notwithstanding any provision of
RSA 395:27, 28 or 29 to the contrary, any deposit account in any
institution, the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, or any other agency or instrumentality of the
United States of America, may not be reduced without the consent of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or such other agency or
instrumentality.

**Source.** 1991, 251:5, eff. June 10, 1991.

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 395:30

 **395:30 Distribution of Assets. –** Payments of dividends under RSA
395:19 and any other proceeds of the property of a closed or insolvent
New Hampshire depository institution shall be distributed according to
the decree of the court in the following priority:
                                             
 I. The payment of the costs and expenses of the liquidation.
                                             
 II. The payment of wage, salary and other claims of employees to the
same extent such claims would be accorded priority under federal
bankruptcy law.
                                             
 III. The payment of claims for deposit accounts including but not
limited to "deposits'' as defined in 12 U.S.C. section 1813(l), or as it
may be later amended from time to time.
                                             
 IV. The payment of liens accorded priority under New Hampshire law.
                                             
 IV-a. Reimbursement of fees or costs paid in advance by a consumer
in relation to a mortgage loan application when the mortgage loan was
not processed due solely to the insolvency of the institution, but only
to the extent such fees or costs were not paid over to a third party for
services actually rendered prior to the insolvency.
                                             
 V. The payment of all debts, claims, and obligations filed in
accordance with RSA 395:13, not accorded priority in the preceding
paragraphs.
                                             
 VI. The payment of delayed claims in accordance with RSA 395:16.
                                             
 VII. The payment of capital debentures issued under RSA 383-A:4-403
and any other obligations expressly subordinated to deposits and to
claims entitled to the priority established in the preceding
paragraphs.
                                             
 VIII. Any funds remaining shall be divided in the case of a stock
institution among the stockholders according to their respective
interests or, in the case of a mutual institution, among the depositors
in proportion to the respective amounts of their deposits.
                                             
 IX. Interest shall be given the same priority as the claim on which
it is based, but no interest shall be paid on any claim until the
principal of all claims within the same class and all higher-priority
classes have been paid or adequately provided for in full.

**Source.** 1911, 68:18. PL 268:29. RL 316:30. RSA 395:30. 1959, 109:6.
1991, 251:6. 1993, 245:1, eff. June 15, 1993. 2015, 272:29, eff. Oct. 1,
2015.

### Section 395:31

 **395:31 Reports by Commissioner. –** The commissioner shall
incorporate in his annual report a statement showing the condition of
any institution in his possession.

**Source.** 1911, 68:19. PL 268:30. RL 316:31.

### Section 395:32

 **395:32 Destruction of Records. –** Records and papers preserved in
the office of the bank commissioner and concerned with the liquidation
of a bank, as provided for in this chapter, may be destroyed at the end
of 10 years after such liquidation proceedings have been completed.

**Source.** 1957, 2:1, eff. July 1, 1957.
