---
title: CHAPTER 397 REGULATION OF BANKS IN EMERGENCIES
---

TITLE XXXV
                                             
BANKS AND BANKING; LOAN ASSOCIATIONS; CREDIT UNIONS
===================================================

CHAPTER 397
                                             
REGULATION OF BANKS IN EMERGENCIES
----------------------------------

### Section 397:1

 **397:1 Banking Emergency. –** Whenever it shall appear to the
governor that the welfare of the state or any section thereof, or the
welfare and security of banks and other institutions under the
supervision of the bank commissioner, hereinafter referred to as banks,
or their depositors or shareholders so require, he may proclaim that a
banking emergency exists and that any bank or banks shall be subject to
special regulation as hereinafter provided until the governor, by
proclamation, declares the period of such banking emergency terminated.
The governor may likewise declare such legal bank holidays as in his
judgment such an emergency may require.

**Source.** 1933, 25:1. RL 318:1.

### Section 397:2

 **397:2 Powers of Bank Commissioner. –** During the period of any
banking emergency so proclaimed, the bank commissioner, hereinafter
called the commissioner, in addition to all other powers conferred upon
him by law, shall have authority to order any one or more banks to
restrict all or any part of their business and to limit or postpone for
any length of time the payment of any amount or proportion of the
deposits in any of the departments thereof as he may deem necessary or
expedient and may further regulate payments therefrom as to time and
amount, as in his opinion the interest of the public or of such bank or
banks or the depositors thereof may require, and may make such further
orders and regulations in respect to the business of such bank or banks
as in his opinion the interest of the public or of such bank or banks or
the depositors thereof may require, and any order or orders made by him
hereunder may be amended, changed, extended, or revoked, in whole or in
part, whenever in his judgment circumstances warrant or require. After
the termination of any such banking emergency, any such order may be
continued in effect as to any particular bank or banks as aforesaid if
in the judgment of the commissioner circumstances warrant or require and
the governor approves.

**Source.** 1933, 25:2. RL 318:2.

### Section 397:3

 **397:3 New Deposits. –** The commissioner may by order authorize
any bank or banks to receive new deposits under such special rules and
regulations as in the opinion of the commissioner the interest of the
public or of such bank or banks or the depositors thereof may require.

**Source.** 1933, 25:3. RL 318:3.

### Section 397:4

 **397:4 New Deposits--Special. –** The commissioner may by order
authorize any bank or banks to receive new deposits, which new deposits
shall be special deposits and designated as such, shall be segregated
from all other deposits and may be invested only in assets approved by
the commissioner as being sufficiently liquid to be available when
needed to meet any demands on account of such special deposits, which
assets shall not be merged with other assets but shall be held in trust
for the security and payment of such special deposits, except that
income from such assets may to the extent authorized by the commissioner
be used by the bank for other proper purposes of the institution, and
the withdrawal of such special deposits shall not be subject in any
respect to restriction or limitation under this chapter.

**Source.** 1933, 25:4. RL 318:4.

### Section 397:5

 **397:5 Penalty for Violation of Rules. –** Whenever the
commissioner shall make any order hereunder, he shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, for the protection of any bank or banks subject
thereto or the depositors thereof, and any person violating any
provision of such a rule shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1933, 25:5. RL 318:5. RSA 397:5. 1973, 528:269. 1985, 55:19,
eff. April 23, 1985.

### Section 397:6

 **397:6 Suspension of Laws. –** All laws inconsistent herewith shall
be suspended during the period of any banking emergency.

**Source.** 1933, 25:7. RL 318:7.
