---
title: CHAPTER 530 LEVY OF EXECUTIONS AGAINST TOWNS AND DISTRICTS
---

TITLE LIV
                                             
EXECUTIONS, LEVIES, BAIL, AND THE RELIEF OF POOR DEBTORS
========================================================

CHAPTER 530
                                             
LEVY OF EXECUTIONS AGAINST TOWNS AND DISTRICTS
----------------------------------------------

### Section 530:1

 **530:1 Levy. –** The goods and estate of towns and of school and
village districts may be taken on execution, and set off or sold,
subject to the provisions of this chapter, as in case of an execution
against an individual.

**Source.** RS 198:1. CS 211:1. GS 220:1. GL 239:1. PS 234:1. PL 346:1.
RL 402:1.

### Section 530:2

 **530:2 Notice of Sale or Setoff. –** Upon a sale or setoff of its
property upon an execution against a town or a school or village
district, the notice in other cases required to be given to the debtor
may be given to one of the selectmen of the town, one of the school
board of the school district, or one of the commissioners of the village
district, as the case may be.

**Source.** GS 220:2. GL 239:2. PS 234:2. PL 346:2. RL 402:2.

Insufficiency of Corporate Property
-----------------------------------

### Section 530:3

 **530:3 Notice of Execution. –** If sufficient goods or estate of
the town or district are not found to satisfy the execution, an attested
copy thereof may be left with one of the selectmen of the town, or with
one of the school board of the school district, or one of the
commissioners of the village district, as the case may be.

**Source.** RS 198:2. CS 211:2. GS 220:3. GL 239:3. PS 234:3. PL 346:3.
RL 402:3.

### Section 530:4

 **530:4 Selectmen's Duty. –** When a copy of an execution against a
town is so left the selectmen shall pay it, or assess a tax upon the
estate liable to taxation therein sufficient to satisfy it and the
officer's fees thereon.

**Source.** RS 198:3. CS 211:3. GS 220:4. GL 239:4. PS 234:4. PL 346:4.
RL 402:4.

### Section 530:5

 **530:5 District Officers. –** When a copy of an execution against a
district is so left the school board or commissioners, as the case may
be, shall pay it, or they shall call a meeting of the voters of the
district, at which meeting they shall vote to raise the necessary sum to
satisfy the execution and the officer's fees thereon.

**Source.** GS 220:5. GL 239:5. PS 234:5. PL 346:5. RL 402:5.

### Section 530:6

 **530:6 Tax. –** When such town or district tax is so assessed it
shall be collected within thirty days, and shall be applied in
satisfaction of the execution.

**Source.** RS 198:3. CS 211:3. GS 220:6. GL 239:6. PS 234:6. PL 346:6.
RL 402:6.

### Section 530:7

 **530:7 Neglect by Selectmen. –** If the selectmen, to whom such
vote of the district is certified, neglect for thirty days to assess the
district tax, and deliver to the collector their warrant for the
collection thereof, such execution against the district may be levied
upon the property of the selectmen.

**Source.** GS 220:7. GL 239:7. PS 234:7. PL 346:7. RL 402:7.

### Section 530:8

 **530:8 Levy on Private Property. –** If the execution is not paid
within sixty days after an attested copy is left as aforesaid it may be
levied as follows: against a town, upon the goods or estate of the
selectmen; against a district, upon the goods or estate of the school
board or of the commissioners, as the case may be. If sufficient goods
and estate of the selectmen, school board or commissioners are not found
it may be levied upon the goods or estate of any inhabitants of the town
or district. If the goods or estate of the aforesaid officers and of the
inhabitants of the town or district are not sufficient, then it may be
levied upon the property in the town or district belonging to any
nonresident.

**Source.** RS 198:5. CS 211:5. GS 220:8. GL 239:8. 1885, 67:1. PS
234:8. PL 346:8. RL 402:8.

### Section 530:9

 **530:9 Petition to Court by Property Owner. –** In case a levy is
begun upon the property of an inhabitant or nonresident, other than one
of the selectmen or of the school board or commissioners, the superior
court, upon application of the person whose property is so levied upon,
or upon the application of any other property owner in the town or
district, shall issue a writ of mandamus ordering the selectmen to
assess and collect a tax sufficient to pay the amount of the execution
and costs.

**Source.** GL 239:8. 1885, 67:2. PS 234:9. 1921, 14:1. PL 346:9. RL
402:9.

### Section 530:10

 **530:10 Petition to Court by Creditor. –** Such writ shall also be
issued, upon application of the execution creditor, in any case where
the execution has not been paid within sixty days after an attested copy
has been left as provided in RSA 530:3.

**Source.** GL 239:8. 1885, 67:2. PS 234:9. 1921, 14:1. PL 346:10. RL
402:10.

### Section 530:11

 **530:11 Effect. –** If application for the writ is made to the
court by a person whose property is levied upon, within thirty days
after the beginning of the levy, further proceedings on the levy shall
be suspended, unless the court shall otherwise order.

**Source.** GL 239:8. 1885, 67:2. PS 234:10. PL 346:11. RL 402:11.

### Section 530:12

 **530:12 Recovery From Town. –** Every person upon whose property an
execution against a town or district has been levied may, in an action
of assumpsit for money paid, recover of such town or district the sum so
levied, and damages and double costs.

**Source.** RS 198:6. CS 211:6. GS 220:10. GL 239:10. 1885, 67:2. PS
234:11. PL 346:12. RL 402:12.
