---
title: 'CHAPTER 570-B PEN REGISTER, TRAP AND TRACE DEVICES'
---

TITLE LVIII
                                             
PUBLIC JUSTICE
==============

CHAPTER 570-B
                                             
PEN REGISTER, TRAP AND TRACE DEVICES
------------------------------------

### Section 570-B:1

 **570-B:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Telecommunication'' has the meaning set forth in RSA 570-A:1.
                                             
 II. "Judge of competent jurisdiction'' means a judge of the superior
court.
                                             
 III. "Pen register'' means a device which records or decodes
electronic or other impulses which identify the numbers dialed or
otherwise transmitted on the telephone line to which such device is
attached, but such term does not include any device used by a provider
or customer of a telecommunication service for billing, or recording as
an incident to billing, for communications services provided by such
provider or any device used by a provider or customer of a
telecommunication service for cost accounting or other like purposes in
the ordinary course of its business.
                                             
 IV. "Trap and trace device'' means a device which captures the
incoming electronic or other impulses which identify the originating
number of an instrument or device from which a telecommunication was
transmitted.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5. 1995, 280:10, II, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 570-B:2

 **570-B:2 General Prohibition on Pen Register and Trap and Trace
Devices. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person is guilty
of an offense if he installs or uses a pen register or a trap and trace
device without first obtaining a court order under this chapter.
                                             
 II. The offense is a misdemeanor if the violation of this chapter is
a first offense. If the violation of this chapter is a second or
subsequent offense, the person shall be guilty of a class B felony.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 570-B:3

 **570-B:3 Exceptions. –** The prohibition of RSA 570-B:2, I does not
apply with respect to the use of a pen register or a trap and trace
device by a provider of telecommunication service:
                                             
 I. Relating to the operation, maintenance, and testing of a
telecommunication service or to the protection of the rights of or
property of such provider, or to the protection of users of that service
from abuse of service or unlawful use of service; or
                                             
 II. To record the fact that a telecommunication was initiated or
completed in order to protect such provider, another provider furnishing
service toward the completion of the telecommunication, or a user of
that service, from fraudulent, unlawful, or abusive use of that service;
or
                                             
 III. Where the consent of the user of that service has been
obtained.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5. 1995, 280:10, II, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 570-B:4

 **570-B:4 Application for an Order for a Pen Register or a Trap and
Trace Device. –**
                                             
 I. The attorney general or the deputy attorney general may make an
application to the superior court for an order or an extension of an
order under RSA 570-B:5, authorizing or approving the installation and
use of a pen register or a trap and trace device under this chapter, in
writing under oath or equivalent affirmation to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
                                             
 II. An application under this chapter shall include:
                                             
 (a) The identity of the attorney for the state making the
application and the identity of the law enforcement agency conducting
the investigation; and
                                             
 (b) A certification by the applicant that the information likely
to be obtained is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation being
conducted by that agency.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 570-B:5

 **570-B:5 Issuance of an Order for a Pen Register or a Trap and
Trace Device. –**
                                             
 I. Upon an application made under RSA 570-B:4, the court shall enter
an ex parte order authorizing the installation and use of a pen register
or a trap and trace device within the state if the court finds that the
attorney general or deputy attorney general has certified to the court
that the information likely to be obtained by such installation and use
is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation.
                                             
 II. An order issued under this section shall specify:
                                             
 (a) The identity, if known, of the person to whom is leased or in
whose name is listed the telephone line to which the pen register or
trap and trace device is to be attached;
                                             
 (b) The identity, if known, of the person who is the subject of
the criminal investigation;
                                             
 (c) The number and, if known, physical location of the telephone
line to which the pen register or trap and trace device is to be
attached and, in the case of a trap and trace device, the geographic
limits of the trap and trace order; and
                                             
 (d) A statement of the offense to which the information likely to
be obtained by the pen register or trap and trace device relates; and
shall direct, upon the request of the applicant, the furnishing of
information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to
accomplish the installation of the pen register or trap and trace
device.
                                             
 III. (a) An order issued under this section shall authorize the
installation and use of a pen register or a trap and trace device for a
period not to exceed 60 days.
                                             
 (b) Extensions of such an order may be granted, but only upon an
application for an order under RSA 570-B:4 and upon the judicial finding
required by RSA 570-B:5. The period of extension shall be for a period
not to exceed 60 days.
                                             
 IV. An order authorizing or approving the installation and use of a
pen register or a trap and trace device shall direct that:
                                             
 (a) The application and order be sealed until otherwise ordered
by the court; and
                                             
 (b) The person owning or leasing the line to which the pen
register or a trap and trace device is attached, or who has been ordered
by the court to provide assistance to the applicant, not disclose the
existence of the pen register or trap and trace device or the existence
of the investigation to the listed subscriber, or to any other person,
unless or until otherwise ordered by the court.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 570-B:6

 **570-B:6 Assistance in Installation and Use of a Pen Register or a
Trap and Trace Device. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the request of an attorney for the state or an officer of a
law enforcement agency authorized to install and use a pen register
under this chapter, a provider of telecommunication service, landlord,
custodian, or other person shall furnish such investigative or law
enforcement officer forthwith all information, facilities, and technical
assistance necessary to accomplish the installation of the pen register
unobtrusively and with a minimum of interference with the services that
the person so ordered by the court accords the party with respect to
whom the installation and use is to take place, if such assistance is
directed by a court order as provided in RSA 570-B:5, II.
                                             
 II. Upon the request of an attorney for the state or an officer of a
law enforcement agency authorized to receive the results of a trap and
trace device under this chapter, a provider of telecommunication
service, landlord, custodian, or other person shall install such device
forthwith on the appropriate line and shall furnish such investigative
or law enforcement officer all additional information, facilities, and
technical assistance including installation and operation of the device
unobtrusively and with a minimum of interference with the services that
the person so ordered by the court accords the party with respect to
whom the installation and use is to take place, if such installation and
assistance is directed by a court order as provided in RSA 570-B:5, II.
Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the results of the trap and trace
device shall be furnished to the officer of a law enforcement agency
designated in the court order, at reasonable intervals during regular
business hours for the duration of the order.
                                             
 III. A provider of a telecommunication service, landlord, custodian,
or other person who furnishes facilities or technical assistance
pursuant to this section shall be reasonably compensated for such
reasonable expenses incurred in providing such facilities and
assistance.
                                             
 IV. No cause of action shall lie in any court against any provider
of a telecommunication service, its officers, employees, agents, or
other specified persons for providing information, facilities, or
assistance in accordance with the terms of the court order under this
chapter.
                                             
 V. A good faith reliance on a court order or a legislative
authorization is a complete defense against any civil or criminal action
brought under this chapter or any other law.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5. 1995, 280:10, II, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 570-B:7

 **570-B:7 Reports Concerning Pen Registers and Trap and Trace
Devices. –** On or before December 1 of each odd numbered year, the
attorney general shall include in the report required of him by RSA
7:37, a report concerning the number of pen register orders and orders
for trap and trace devices applied for by the department of justice.

**Source.** 1988, 25:5, eff. July 1, 1988.
