---
title: 'CHAPTER 571-B EXPOSING MINORS TO HARMFUL MATERIALS'
---

TITLE LVIII
                                             
PUBLIC JUSTICE
==============

CHAPTER 571-B
                                             
EXPOSING MINORS TO HARMFUL MATERIALS
------------------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 571-B:1

 **571-B:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Harmful to minors'' means that quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form of sexual conduct, when it:
                                             
 (a) Predominantly appeals to the prurient interest of minors in
sex, that is, an interest in lewdness or lascivious thoughts;
                                             
 (b) Depicts or describes sexual conduct in a manner so explicit
as to be patently offensive to contemporary adult standards, in the
county within which any offense set forth in this chapter was committed,
with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
                                             
 (c) Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
                                             
 II. "Knowingly'' means having general knowledge of, or reason to
know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection
or inquiry, or both, as to:
                                             
 (a) The character and content of any material described herein
which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and
                                             
 (b) The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest
mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the
defendant made a reasonably bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age
of such minor.
                                             
 III. "Minor'' means any person under the age of 18 years.
                                             
 IV. "Sexual conduct'' means human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
actual or simulated, normal or perverted, or any touching of the
genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals, any depiction or
representation of excretory functions, any lewd exhibitions of the
genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship. Sexual intercourse is simulated when it depicts sexual
intercourse which give the appearance of the consummation of sexual
intercourse, normal or perverted.

**Source.** 1969, 252:1. 1976, 46:1. 1977, 123:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1977.

### Section 571-B:2

 **571-B:2 Offenses. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give, sell, loan
or otherwise provide, with or without monetary consideration, to a
minor:
                                             
 (a) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture
film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of
the human body which depicts sexual conduct and which is harmful to
minors, or
                                             
 (b) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in
RSA 571-B:2, I(a), or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or
narrative accounts of sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
                                             
 II. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, for or
without monetary consideration, to a minor or knowingly to sell to a
minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor, for or
without monetary consideration, to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part,
depicts or describes sexual conduct and which is harmful to minors.

**Source.** 199, 252:1. 1976, 46:2, eff. June 1, 1976.

### Section 571-B:3

 **571-B:3 Penalty. –** A person convicted of any violation of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1969, 252:1. 1977, 588:9, eff. Sept. 16, 1977.

Preliminary Hearing
-------------------

### Section 571-B:4

 **571-B:4 Preliminary Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. No recognized or established school, museum, public library or
governmental agency, nor any person acting as an employee or agent of
such institution, shall be arrested, charged or indicted for any
violation of a provision of this chapter until such time as the material
involved has first been the subject of an adversary hearing wherein such
institution or person is made a defendant, and, after such material is
declared by the court to be harmful to minors, such institution or
person continues to engage in the conduct prohibited by this chapter.
The sole issue at the hearing shall be whether the material is harmful
to minors.
                                             
 II. The adversary hearing prescribed in paragraph I of this section
may be initiated only by complaint of the county attorney or the
attorney general. Hearing on the complaint shall be held in the superior
court of the county in which the alleged violation occurs. Notice of the
complaint and of the hearing shall be given by registered mail or
personal service. The notice shall state the nature of the violation,
the date, place and time of the hearing, and the right to present and
cross examine witnesses. In addition to the defendant, any other
interested party may appear at the hearing in opposition to the
complaint and may present and cross examine witnesses. For the purposes
of this paragraph, the term "interested party'' includes but is not
limited to the manufacturer of the material alleged to be harmful to
minors.
                                             
 III. The state or any defendant may appeal from a judgment. Such
appeal shall not stay the judgment. Any defendant engaging in conduct
prohibited by this chapter subsequent to notice of the judgment finding
the material to be harmful to minors shall be subject to criminal
prosecution notwithstanding the appeal from the judgment.

**Source.** 1979, 397:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.
