---
title: 'CHAPTER 261-B MULTI-USE DECAL PLATES'
---

TITLE XXI
                                             
MOTOR VEHICLES
==============

CHAPTER 261-B
                                             
MULTI-USE DECAL PLATES
----------------------

### Section 261-B:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:1 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:1 Multi-Use Decal Plates Authorized. –**
                                             
 The department of safety shall issue multi-use decal plates. The
design shall provide an area 3 inches by 3 inches for the placement of a
decal representing an organization authorized by statute to issue
decals. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, multi-use decal
plates shall have the same effect and be issued in the same manner as
other number plates. Multi-use number plates shall retain the "live free
or die'' logo.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:2 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:2 Decals. –**
                                             
 I. Decals shall be made of nonreflectorized material and
manufactured to maintain their visibility for a minimum of 36 months.
                                             
 II. Decals may only be placed on multi-use decal plates issued
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 III. Decals shall be distributed by organizations authorized by
statute.
                                             
 IV. Decals shall include a unique sequence number.
                                             
 V. The authorized organization may collect a fee for the decal.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:3 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:3 Authorized Organizations. –**
                                             
 I. Organizations that have statutory authority to issue decals (i)
shall have been granted and continue to hold tax exempt status under 26
U.S.C. section 501(c)(3) to participate in the multi-use decal number
plate program, (ii) shall have a New Hampshire address registered with
the department of justice, and (iii) shall not be named for, or
associated with, a political issue or a person who seeks, holds, or has
held a public office. To issue decals under this chapter, an
organization shall file an annual report with the director of motor
vehicles, in a format and time established by the director, containing
the following:
                                             
 (a) Address of the organization's headquarters.
                                             
 (b) Name, address, and telephone number of the coordinator of the
organization's decal program.
                                             
 (c) A sample of the decal to be issued.
                                             
 (d) A statement verifying that the images used in the decals do
not infringe on any other person's intellectual property or a release
from the owner authorizing the use of the images.
                                             
 (e) A list of persons receiving decals from the organization and
the sequence number assigned to each person.
                                             
 (f) Fees received by the organization and their distribution.
                                             
 (g) Verification of the organization's continuing status as a
tax-exempt organization under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(3).
                                             
 (h) A statement that the organization will continue to
participate in the program.
                                             
 II. An organization may end its participation in the multi-use decal
number plate program by written notification to the director of motor
vehicles and filing a final annual report within 30 days of the
notification.
                                             
 III. Participation in the multi-use decal number plate program shall
terminate automatically if the organization fails to file its annual
report under paragraph I or files a report that does not include the
statement required by subparagraph I(h).
                                             
 IV. A person displaying the decal of an organization that is no
longer participating in the program on a multi-use decal number plate
may continue to display the decal until the next expiration of the
vehicle's registration.
                                             
 V. Organizations shall allow a purchaser of a decal to purchase a
new decal no less frequently than every 36 months.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:4 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:4 Issuance and Renewal; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The fee for multi-use decal number plates shall be 
                                             $15 per year
per set, which shall be in addition to any other registration and number
plate fees. This fee shall not be prorated.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of safety shall deposit 
                                             $5
from each fee collected under paragraph I in the department of safety
inventory fund established by RSA 228:25. The remainder shall be
deposited in the highway fund.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:5 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:5 Vehicles Eligible. –**
                                             
 Multi-use decal number plates may be used on passenger motor
vehicles and recreation vehicles.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:6 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:6 Misuse of Decals. –**
                                             
 Only decals issued by organizations authorized by statute may be
displayed on multi-use decal number plates. Use of an unauthorized decal
shall be a violation punishable by a fine of 
                                             $50 plus penalty
assessment.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:7


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:7 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:7 Change of Decals. –**
                                             
 The holder of a multi-use decal number plate may replace a decal
with a decal from a different authorized organization.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.

### Section 261-B:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 261-B:8 effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **261-B:8 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 The commissioner of the department of safety shall adopt rules
pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to the administration of the multi-use
decal number plate program.

**Source.** 2016, 279:1, eff. July 1, 2017.
