---
title: |
    CHAPTER 262 ANTITHEFT LAWS, OFFENSES, PENALTIES, HABITUAL OFFENDERS,
    ARREST OF NONRESIDENTS AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
---

TITLE XXI
                                             
MOTOR VEHICLES
==============

CHAPTER 262
                                             
ANTITHEFT LAWS, OFFENSES, PENALTIES, HABITUAL OFFENDERS, ARREST OF NONRESIDENTS AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Offenses and Antitheft Provisions
---------------------------------

### Section 262:1

 **262:1 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. A person who, with fraudulent intent:
                                             
 (a) Alters, forges or counterfeits a certificate of title or
certificate of origin;
                                             
 (b) Alters or forges an assignment of a certificate of title or a
certificate of origin, or an assignment or release of a security
interest, on a certificate of title or a certificate of origin or a form
the director prescribes;
                                             
 (c) Has possession of or uses a certificate of title or
certificate of origin knowing it to have been altered, forged or
counterfeited; or
                                             
 (d) Uses a false or fictitious name or address, or makes a false
statement, or fails to disclose a security interest, or conceals any
other material fact, in an application for a certificate of title or
certificate of origin, or in any proof or statement in writing in
connection therewith, shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. A person who:
                                             
 (a) With fraudulent intent, permits another, not entitled
thereto, to use or have possession of a certificate of title;
                                             
 (b) Wilfully fails to mail or deliver a certificate of title or
application therefor to the department within 20 days after the time
required by this title;
                                             
 (c) Wilfully fails to deliver to his transferee a certificate of
title within 20 days after the time required by this title; or
                                             
 (d) Wilfully violates any provision of this chapter, except as
provided in paragraph I, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:31. 1967, 357:1. 1973, 528:155. 1977, 166:1;
196:4. 1981, 146:1. 1987, 263:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1988. 2014, 278:7, eff.
Sept. 26, 2014.

### Section 262:2

 **262:2 Report of Theft; Recovery of Unclaimed Vehicle. –**
                                             
 I. A peace officer who learns of the theft of a vehicle not since
recovered, or of the recovery of a vehicle whose theft or conversion he
knows or has reason to believe has been reported to the department,
shall forthwith report the theft or recovery to the department.
                                             
 II. An owner or a lienholder may report the theft of a vehicle, or
its conversion, if a crime, to the department, but the director may
disregard the report of a conversion unless a warrant has been issued
for the arrest of a person charged with the conversion. A person who has
so reported the theft or conversion of a vehicle shall, forthwith after
learning of its recovery, report the recovery to the department.
                                             
 III. An operator of a place of business for garaging, repairing,
parking, or storing vehicles for the public, in which a vehicle remains
unclaimed for a period of 30 days, shall within 5 days after the
expiration of that period, report the vehicle as unclaimed to the
director. A vehicle left by its owner whose name and address are known
to the operator or his employee is not considered unclaimed. A person
who fails to report a vehicle as unclaimed in accordance with this
paragraph forfeits all claims and liens for its garaging, parking, or
storing and shall be fined not more than 
                                             $25 for each day the failure
to report continues. The report required under this paragraph shall be
by verified mail, as defined in RSA 451-C:1, VII.
                                             
 IV. The department shall maintain and appropriately index weekly any
cumulative public records of stolen, converted, recovered and unclaimed
vehicles reported to it pursuant to this section. The director may make
and distribute copies of the records so maintained to police officers
upon request without fee and to others for the fee, if any, the
commissioner prescribes.
                                             
 V. The director may suspend the registration of a vehicle whose
theft or conversion is reported to him pursuant to this section; until
the department learns of its recovery or that the report of its theft or
conversion was erroneous, it shall not issue a certificate of title for
the vehicle.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:32. 1967, 357:1. 1981, 146:1. 2012, 207:3, eff.
Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 262:3

 **262:3 False Report. –** A person who knowingly makes a false
report of the theft or conversion of a vehicle to a police officer or to
the director shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:33. 1967, 357:1. 1973, 528:156. 1981, 146:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:3-a

 **262:3-a Notification of Repossession. –** Any person who
repossesses a motor vehicle, as defined in RSA 259:87-a, shall notify,
within 2 hours after the repossession, a police officer of the town or
city where the act of repossession occurred of the fact of the
repossession and the name, address and telephone number of the owner and
lienholder. If no police officer is available to receive the
notification, then notification shall be given to the sheriff's
department of the county where the act of repossession occurred. The
police department or sheriff shall keep a record of such notification
for 30 days after the notification.

**Source.** 1993, 58:2, eff. June 15, 1993.

### Section 262:4

 **262:4 Impeachment of Credibility of Defendant. –** In a
prosecution for a crime specified in this subdivision, a certified copy
of a conviction under RSA 262:1, I is admissible to impeach the
credibility of the defendant.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:34. 1967, 357:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:5

 **262:5 Penalties Additional to Other Statutes. –** The penal
provisions of this chapter in no way repeal or modify any existing
provision of criminal law but are additional and supplementary thereto.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:35. 1967, 357:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:6

 **262:6 Identification Marks. –** No motor vehicle shall be
registered unless it shall have permanently cut, impressed, or embossed
on some portion thereof a factory, serial, or vehicle identification
number or mark. Any person who shall knowingly have in his possession
any motor vehicle from which such number or mark shall have been
removed, defaced, obliterated, or changed, shall forthwith file with the
department a sworn statement giving the reason therefor, a description
of the vehicle, and the source of his title. If satisfied as to the
facts the director may grant permission to cut, impress, or emboss
permanently into the motor of such vehicle a special identification
number or mark which shall thereafter be deemed sufficient for the
purpose of registration of such vehicle.

**Source.** 1931, 79:1. RL 116:5. RSA 260:7. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1982.

### Section 262:7

 **262:7 Changed or Removed Vehicle Identification Number. –** Any
person who buys, receives, possesses, sells or disposes of a motor
vehicle or an engine for a motor vehicle, knowing that a vehicle
identification number of said motor vehicle or engine has been removed,
defaced, obliterated, or changed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor;
provided, however, if upon discovery by any person that a vehicle
identification number has been removed, defaced, obliterated, or
changed, he shall report the same to the nearest police station and
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.

**Source.** RSA 260:7-a. 1967, 214:1. 1973, 528:132. 1981, 146:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:8

 **262:8 Concealing Identity of Vehicle. –** Any person who buys,
receives, possesses, sells or disposes of a motor vehicle or an engine
for a motor vehicle, with knowledge that a vehicle identification number
of the motor vehicle or engine has been removed, defaced, obliterated,
or changed and with intent to conceal or misrepresent the identity of
the motor vehicle or engine shall be guilty of a class B felony if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 260:7-b. 1967, 214:1. 1973, 528:133. 1981, 146:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:9

 **262:9 Penalty for Removing. –** No person shall willfully remove,
deface, obliterate, change, or cause to be removed, obliterated,
defaced, or changed any factory, serial, or other vehicle identification
number or mark on or from any motor vehicle. Whoever violates any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1931, 79:1. RL 116:6. RSA 260:8. 1973, 528:134. 1981, 146:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:10

 **262:10 Removal of Vehicle Identification Plate. –** It shall be a
misdemeanor for any person or persons to remove or cause to be removed a
vehicle identification number plate assigned to a vehicle by the
manufacturer or the director for the purpose of concealing the identity
of a vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to have
in his possession for such purpose such a vehicle identification number
plate.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:20-a. 1969, 504:6. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:11

 **262:11 Examination of Vehicles. –** The director or his agents,
including title investigators, are authorized to examine any vehicle on
the premises of any new or used car dealer, at any body shop, auction,
salvage yard, or any shop where vehicles are repaired or restored for
the purpose of checking vehicle identification numbers or investigating
any violation in the process of selling, repairing, junking, dismantling
or crushing a vehicle.

**Source.** RSA 269-A:20-b. 1977, 191:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:12

 **262:12 Taking Without Owner's Consent. –** If any person shall
willfully, or mischievously take, drive, or use any motor vehicle
without the consent of the owner or person having control thereof, but
not with intent to steal the same, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1945, 80:1. RSA 263:82. 1971, 26:1. 1973, 528:146. 1981,
146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:13

 **262:13 Possession of Master Keys. –** No person shall have in his
possession a motor vehicle master key except for the following:
                                             
 I. Motor vehicle dealers registered under RSA 261:104.
                                             
 II. Garage mechanics, parking lot attendants or others engaged in
the business of repairing, storing or maintaining physical security over
motor vehicles.
                                             
 III. Law enforcement officers.
                                             
 IV. Locksmiths, key makers or other persons engaged in the business
of designing, making, altering, duplicating or repairing locks or keys.
                                             
 V. A common or contract carrier when such keys are for use
incidental to the conduct of its business.
                                             
 VI. Officers or employees of any automobile club or association if
such keys are for use in connection with the activities of such club or
association.
                                             
 VII. Employees of any governmental agency if such keys are for use
in connection with the activities of such agency.

**Source.** RSA 263:82-b. 1967, 222:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:14

 **262:14 Master Keys; Prohibited Acts. –** No person shall purchase,
print, circulate, distribute, sell, or offer for sale advertising or
publications containing advertisements promoting the sale of master keys
as defined herein except in connection with trade publications or other
advertisements intended primarily for those engaged in the activities
specified in RSA 262:13.

**Source.** RSA 263:82-c. 1967, 222:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:15

 **262:15 Master Keys; Penalty. –** Any person who violates the
provisions of RSA 262:13 and 14 shall be guilty of a class B felony if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 263:82-d. 1967, 222:1. 1973, 528:147. 1981, 146:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:16

 **262:16 Counterfeit, Unauthorized or Forged Stickers, or Decals or
Facsimile; Altered or Modified Temporary Motor Vehicle Registration
Plates. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall make, cause to be manufactured or issued, or
shall display, use, offer for sale, possess, sell or alter an unofficial
inspection sticker or an unofficial vehicle registration validation
decal with intent to defraud or facilitate a fraud shall, if a natural
person, be guilty of a misdemeanor; and any other person shall be guilty
of a felony.
                                             
 II. Any person who, without authority from the director, shall make,
cause to be manufactured or issued, display, use, offer for sale,
possess, sell or alter an official inspection sticker or an official
vehicle registration decal with intent to defraud or facilitate a fraud
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or a felony if any
other person.
                                             
 III. Any person who displays a facsimile of an official inspection
sticker upon any vehicle, or who displays a facsimile of a motor vehicle
registration validation decal upon a vehicle, or displays an official
inspection sticker and knows or should have known that the inspection
sticker was improperly issued or obtained, or who displays an official
vehicle registration validation decal and knows or should have known
that the registration decal was improperly issued or obtained shall be
guilty of a violation.
                                             
 IV. Any person who alters or displays on any vehicle, an altered or
modified temporary motor vehicle registration plate, and who knows or
should have known that the temporary registration was altered, or
falsely obtained, shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** RSA 260:16-b. 1973, 159:1. 1979, 358:1, I. 1981, 146:1.
1983, 431:8. 1997, 12:1, 2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 262:16-a

 **262:16-a Seizure of Unauthorized Documents and Plates. –** The
director and such employees of the department, and peace officers as he
shall designate, are hereby authorized to take possession of any
certificate of title, registration or license issued by this or any
other state, which has been revoked, cancelled, or suspended, or which
is fictitious, stolen or altered.

**Source.** 1981, 479:21, eff. Jan. 1, 1982 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 262:17

 **262:17 Odometer Tampering; Certification of Mileage. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of an offense if:
                                             
 (a) He changes, tampers with or defaces, or attempts to change,
tamper with or deface, any gauge, dial, or other mechanical instrument,
commonly known as an odometer or an hour meter in a motor vehicle,
highway building appliance, snowmobile or boat, which, under normal
circumstances and without being changed, tampered with or defaced, is
designated to show by numbers or words the distance which the motor
vehicle, highway building appliance, snowmobile or boat has traveled or
the use sustained with the intention of misrepresenting to a prospective
or eventual purchaser the number of miles traveled or the use sustained
by said motor vehicle, highway building appliance, snowmobile or boat;
or
                                             
 (b) Being the owner of or agent for the owner of a motor vehicle,
highway building appliance, snowmobile or boat, he knowingly fails to
certify the actual mileage of such motor vehicle, highway building
appliance, snowmobile or boat to the best of his knowledge at the time
of sale, trade or other type of transaction resulting in an assignment
of title of the motor vehicle, highway building appliance, snowmobile or
boat; or
                                             
 (c) Being the transferee of or agent for the transferee of a
motor vehicle, he knowingly accepts an assignment of a certificate of
title from the previous owner unless the actual mileage of the motor
vehicle at the time of sale, trade, or other type of transfer resulting
in an assignment of title to the motor vehicle has been entered on the
certificate of title and certified by the previous owner to the best of
his knowledge.
                                             
 II. Evidence that any odometer or hour meter shows less mileage or
fewer hours after it has come into the possession of any person than was
shown before it came into his possession shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of paragraph I(a) of this section, except for those
odometers which have been repaired or replaced as provided in 15 U.S.C.,
section 1987(a).
                                             
 III. Certification of actual mileage pursuant to paragraph I(b) of
this section shall be:
                                             
 (a) By an entry on the certificate of title or the application
for a title if a certificate of title is required;
                                             
 (b) By a notarized statement signed by the seller if no
certificate of title is required.
                                             
 IV. A person who commits an offense under this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor for the first offense and, for a subsequent
offense, shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural person or a
felony if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 260:91, 92. 1971, 533:1. 1973, 528:136. 1977, 184:1.
1981, 146:1; 429:1, 2. 1983, 289:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

Habitual Offenders
------------------

### Section 262:18

 **262:18 Declaration of Policy. –** It is hereby declared to be the
policy of New Hampshire:
                                             
 I. To provide maximum safety for all persons who travel or otherwise
use the ways of the state; and
                                             
 II. To deny the privilege of driving motor vehicles on such ways to
persons who by their conduct and record have demonstrated their
indifference for the safety and welfare of others and their disrespect
for the laws of the state, the orders of her court and the statutorily
required acts of her administrative agencies; and
                                             
 III. To discourage repetition of criminal acts by individuals
against the peace and dignity of the state and her political
subdivisions and to impose increased and added deprivation of the
privilege to drive motor vehicles upon habitual offenders who have been
convicted repeatedly of violations of traffic laws.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:1. 1969, 433:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:19

 **262:19 Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. When the director determines that any person is an habitual
offender within the meaning of RSA 259:39, he shall issue an order
requiring that person to appear for a hearing to show cause why he
should not be barred from driving a motor vehicle upon the ways of this
state. The show cause order shall incorporate a certified transcript or
abstract of the person's conviction record, which shall be prima facie
evidence that the person named therein was duly convicted, by the court
in which such conviction or holding was made, of each offense shown by
such transcript or abstract. If any person shall deny any of the facts
stated in the transcript or abstract, he shall have the burden of
proving that such is untrue. For the purposes of this chapter, a plea of
nolo contendere shown on such transcript or abstract shall not make the
same inadmissible.
                                             
 II. If a person denies he was convicted of any offense necessary for
a holding that he is an habitual offender and if the director cannot, on
the evidence available to him, make such a determination, the director
may certify the decision of such issue to the court in which the
conviction was made. The court to which certification is made shall
immediately conduct a hearing to determine the issue and send a
certified copy of its final order determining the issue to the
director.
                                             
 III. If the director finds that the person is not the same person
named in the transcript or that the abstract does not contain the number
of valid convictions required by RSA 259:39, the proceeding shall be
dismissed. If the director finds that the person is the same person
named in the transcript or abstract and that the person is an habitual
offender, the director shall, by appropriate order, revoke the person's
driver's license and direct the person not to drive a motor vehicle on
the ways of this state for a period of one to 4 years effective upon the
date of the order or upon dates of final conviction of the offense that
resulted in certification. All licenses or permits to operate a motor
vehicle on the ways of this state must be surrendered to the director. A
copy of the order shall become part of the record of the division of
motor vehicles.
                                             
 IV. No conviction for an offense specified under RSA 259:39 shall be
annulled until at least 7 years after the conviction date. No court
shall vacate, expunge, delete, cancel or otherwise remove such a
conviction for at least 7 years subsequent to the conviction date,
unless it is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the
conviction was illegal or otherwise improper and invalid.
                                             
 V. The director may use convictions obtained in another state for
the offense of reckless operation, driving while intoxicated, operating
after suspension or revocation, manslaughter resulting from the
operation of a motor vehicle, and negligent homicide resulting from the
operation of a motor vehicle for the purpose of certifying an habitual
offender.
                                             
 VI. A person who had his license revoked pursuant to RSA 262:19, III
prior to July 17, 1987, may petition the director after a minimum of one
year of such revocation for restoration of his driving privileges. The
commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the
conditions under which the director may restore a driver's license
revoked under such conditions prior to the expiration of the original
period of revocation.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:3. 1969, 433:1. 1973, 584:2. 1975, 496:2. 1981,
146:1. 1983, 373:2. 1985, 213:10. 1987, 238:2, 3. 1988, 238:1, 2. 1998,
325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 262:20

 **262:20 Commencement of Civil Proceeding. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985,
213:26, I, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 262:21

 **262:21 Civil Procedure. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 213:26, I, eff. Jan.
1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 262:22

 **262:22 Prohibition. –** No license to drive motor vehicles in New
Hampshire shall be issued to an habitual offender:
                                             
 I. Until such time as the period of revocation imposed pursuant to
RSA 262:19, III has been served;
                                             
 II. Until such time as financial responsibility requirements are
met, or until the commissioner, for good cause shown, grants a waiver of
the requirements. Such waiver shall only be granted where the habitual
offender has not driven a motor vehicle in violation of the order and
has not held a license for 5 years or more; and
                                             
 III. Until the license of such person to drive a motor vehicle in
this state has been restored in writing by an order of the director or
of a court of record entered in a proceeding as hereinafter provided.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:6. 1969, 433:1. 1981, 146:1. 1985, 213:11. 1987,
238:4. 2012, 60:1, eff. May 14, 2012.

### Section 262:23


                                             


                                             [RSA 262:23 effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 262:23 set
out below.
                                             ]

 **262:23 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on
the ways of this state while an order of the director or the court
prohibiting such driving remains in effect. If any person found to be an
habitual offender under the provisions of this chapter is convicted of
driving a motor vehicle on the ways of this state while an order of the
director or the court prohibiting such operation is in effect, he or she
shall be guilty of a felony and sentenced, notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA title LXII, to imprisonment for not less than one year
nor more than 5 years. No portion of the minimum mandatory sentence
shall be suspended, and no case brought to enforce this chapter shall be
continued for sentencing; provided, however, that any sentence or part
thereof imposed pursuant to this section may be suspended in cases in
which the driving of a motor vehicle was necessitated by situations of
apparent extreme emergency which required such operation to save life or
limb. Any sentence of one year or less imposed pursuant to this
paragraph shall be served in a county correctional facility. The
sentencing court may order that any such offender may serve his or her
sentence under home confinement pursuant to RSA 651:19 based on the
rules and regulations of the county correctional facility where the
sentence is to be served for the minimum mandatory term or any portion
thereof, provided the offender first serves 14 consecutive days of
imprisonment prior to eligibility for home confinement. Habitual
offenders shall only be eligible for the home confinement program once
per lifetime. Any sentence of more than one year imposed pursuant to
this paragraph shall be served in the state prison.
                                             
 II. For the purpose of enforcing this section, in any case in which
the accused is charged with driving a motor vehicle while his license,
permit or privilege to drive is suspended or revoked, or is charged with
driving without a license, the court before hearing such charge shall
determine whether such person has been held an habitual offender and by
reason of such holding is barred from driving a motor vehicle on the
ways of this state. For the purposes of this section, in determining
whether the person has been held an habitual offender and by reason of
such holding is barred from driving a motor vehicle on the ways of this
state, a certified copy of the individual's motor vehicle record on file
with the division shall be as competent evidence in any court within
this state as the original record would be if produced by the director
as legal custodian thereof.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding paragraph I, any person who qualifies under RSA
259:39 shall not be subject to the minimum mandatory provisions of
paragraph I if, and only if, that person's certification was not based
on any conviction under RSA 265-A:2, I or any misdemeanor or felony
motor vehicle conviction pursuant to RSA title XXI, and that person has
not been convicted of any such offense, or any reasonably similar
offense in any jurisdiction within the United States and Canada, since
the date of the certification; provided, however, that any such person
shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor and may be sentenced to one
year or less. Any person incarcerated on June 8, 1992, pursuant to
certification as an habitual offender under RSA 259:39, who does not
have a conviction under RSA 265-A:2, I involving a vehicle or any
misdemeanor or felony motor vehicle convictions pursuant to RSA title
XXI, may apply immediately to the superior court for sentence review and
reduction.


                                             [RSA 262:23 effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 262:23 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**262:23 Penalty.** --
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on
the ways of this state while an order of the director or the court
prohibiting such driving remains in effect. If any person found to be an
habitual offender under the provisions of this chapter is convicted of
driving a motor vehicle on the ways of this state while an order of the
director or the court prohibiting such operation is in effect, he or she
shall be guilty of a felony and sentenced, notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA title LXII, to imprisonment for not more than 5 years.
No case brought to enforce this chapter shall be continued for
sentencing; provided, however, that any sentence or part thereof imposed
pursuant to this section may be suspended in cases in which the driving
of a motor vehicle was necessitated by situations of apparent extreme
emergency which required such operation to save life or limb. Any
sentence of one year or less imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall be
served in a county correctional facility. The sentencing court may order
that any such offender may serve his or her sentence under home
confinement pursuant to RSA 651:19 based on the rules and regulations of
the county correctional facility where the sentence is to be served,
provided the offender first serves 14 consecutive days of imprisonment
prior to eligibility for home confinement. Habitual offenders shall only
be eligible for the home confinement program once per lifetime. Any
sentence of more than one year imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall
be served in the state prison.
                                             
 II. For the purpose of enforcing this section, in any case in which
the accused is charged with driving a motor vehicle while his license,
permit or privilege to drive is suspended or revoked, or is charged with
driving without a license, the court before hearing such charge shall
determine whether such person has been held an habitual offender and by
reason of such holding is barred from driving a motor vehicle on the
ways of this state. For the purposes of this section, in determining
whether the person has been held an habitual offender and by reason of
such holding is barred from driving a motor vehicle on the ways of this
state, a certified copy of the individual's motor vehicle record on file
with the division shall be as competent evidence in any court within
this state as the original record would be if produced by the director
as legal custodian thereof.
                                             
 III. Any person incarcerated on June 8, 1992, pursuant to
certification as an habitual offender under RSA 259:39, who does not
have a conviction under RSA 265-A:2, I involving a vehicle or any
misdemeanor or felony motor vehicle convictions pursuant to RSA title
XXI, may apply immediately to the superior court for sentence review and
reduction.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:7. 1969, 433:1. 1973, 528:142; 584:5. 1981, 146:1;
543:7, 8. 1985, 213:12. 1988, 238:3, 7. 1992, 31:1. 2000, 307:1, 2.
2001, 169:4. 2003, 237:10. 2006, 260:18, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2016, 312:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 262:24

 **262:24 Restoration of License. –** Upon the expiration of the
revocation period imposed pursuant to RSA 262:19, III, or under
conditions established by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 262:19, VI,
such person may petition the director for restoration of his license to
drive a motor vehicle on the ways of this state. Upon such petition, and
for good cause shown, the director may restore to such person the
license to drive a motor vehicle on the ways of this state upon such
terms and conditions as the director may prescribe subject to other
provisions of law relating to the issuance of drivers' licenses.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:8. 1969, 433:1. 1973, 584:6. 1981, 146:1. 1985,
213:13. 1987, 238:5. 1988, 238:4, eff. April 30, 1988.

### Section 262:25

 **262:25 Appeal. –** An appeal to the superior court of Merrimack
county may be had from any final action or order of the director
pursuant to this chapter within 30 days of the date of the final action
or order. All findings of the director upon all questions of fact
properly before him shall be deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable
and shall not be disturbed on appeal, unless the court finds that they
could not reasonably have been made. The action or order appealed from
shall not be set aside or vacated unless the party appealing shall prove
that the director acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction,
authority, or observance of law. An appeal to the supreme court of New
Hampshire may be had from any action or order of the superior court
entered under RSA 262:25 in the same manner and form as such an appeal
would be noted, perfected, and tried in any other criminal action.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:9. 1969, 433:1. 1973, 584:7. 1981, 146:1. 1985,
213:14. 1987, 238:5, eff. July 17, 1987.

### Section 262:26

 **262:26 Existing Law. –** Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed as amending, modifying or repealing any existing law of New
Hampshire or any existing ordinance of any political subdivision
relating to the driving or licensing of vehicles, the licensing of
persons to drive vehicles or providing penalties for the violation
thereof; or shall be construed so as to preclude the exercise of the
regulatory powers of any division, agency, department or political
subdivision of the state having the statutory power to regulate such
driving and licensing.

**Source.** RSA 262-B:10. 1969, 433:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

Reciprocal Provisions as to Arrest of Nonresidents
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 262:27

 **262:27 Issuance of Citation to Resident of Reciprocating State.
–**
                                             
 I. Other provisions of law to the contrary notwithstanding, a police
officer making an arrest for a traffic violation shall issue a citation
as appropriate to any motorist who is a resident of or holds a license
issued by a reciprocating state and shall not, subject to the exceptions
noted in RSA 262:27, II, require such motorist to post bail or bond to
secure appearance for trial, but shall accept such motorist's personal
recognizance that he will comply with the terms of such citation;
provided, however, that a person so arrested shall have the right upon
his request to post bail or bond in a manner provided by law and, in
such case, the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply.
                                             
 II. No motorist shall be entitled to receive a citation under the
provisions of RSA 262:27, I, nor shall any police officer issue such
citation under said paragraph, if the offense for which the citation
would be issued is one of the following:
                                             
 (a) An offense for which the issuance of a citation in lieu of a
hearing or the posting of collateral or bond is prohibited by the laws
of this state; or
                                             
 (b) An offense, the conviction of or the forfeiture of collateral
for which requires the suspension or revocation of the motorist's
license.
                                             
 III. Upon the failure of any nonresident to comply with the terms of
such a traffic citation, the court having jurisdiction may issue a
warrant for his arrest and he shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of RSA 642:8. The court shall notify the department of the failure of
the cited nonresident to appear. Said notification shall clearly
identify the person arrested; describe the violation, specifying the
section of the statute, code or ordinance violated; shall indicate the
location of the offense, give description of vehicle involved, and show
the registration or license number of the vehicle.

**Source.** RSA 264-A:2. 1971, 349:1. 1981, 146:1. 1988, 110:11. 1989,
386:10, eff. June 5, 1989.

### Section 262:28

 **262:28 Department to Transmit Court Notification to Reciprocating
State; Suspension of Resident's License for Noncompliance With Citation
Issued by Reciprocating State. –**
                                             
 I. Upon receipt of a court notification pursuant to RSA 262:27, III,
the department shall transmit a certified copy of said notification to
the official in charge of the issuance of licenses in the reciprocating
state in which the nonresident resides or by which he is licensed.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt from the licensing authority of a reciprocating
state in which an arrest was made, of a certification of noncompliance
with a citation issued in a reciprocating state by a person holding a
driver's license issued by this state, the director forthwith shall
suspend such person's license. The order of suspension shall indicate
the reason for the order, and shall notify the motorist that his license
shall remain suspended until he has furnished evidence satisfactory to
the department that he has fully complied with the terms of the citation
which was the basis for the suspension order.
                                             
 III. A copy of any suspension order issued hereunder shall be
furnished to the licensing authority of the reciprocating state in which
the arrest was made.
                                             
 IV. It shall be the duty of the director to ascertain and remain
informed as to which states are "reciprocating states'' hereunder and,
accordingly, to maintain a current listing of such states, which listing
he shall from time to time cause to be disseminated among the
appropriate departments, divisions, bureaus and agencies of this state,
the principal executive officers of the several counties, cities and
towns of this state and the licensing authorities in all other states
which are, have been, or claim to be a "reciprocating state'' pursuant
hereto.

**Source.** RSA 264-A:3. 1971, 349:1. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:28-a

 **262:28-a Foreign Diplomatic and Consular Officers. –**
                                             
 I. This section shall apply only to persons who display drivers'
licenses issued by the United States Department of State to a law
enforcement officer, or who otherwise claim immunities and privileges
under Title 22, Chapter 6 of the United States Code with respect to
violations of RSA 630:2, RSA 630:3, or any provision of this title.
                                             
 II. If a person who is subject to this section is stopped by a law
enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that the person
has violated RSA 630:2, RSA 630:3, or any provision of this title, the
law enforcement officer shall:
                                             
 (a) As soon as practicable, contact the United States Department
of State office in order to verify the driver's status and immunity, if
any;
                                             
 (b) Record all relevant information from any driver's license or
identification card, including a driver's license issued by the United
States Department of State; and
                                             
 (c) Within 5 work days after the date of the stop, forward to the
department:
                                             
 (1) A vehicle accident report, if the person was involved in a
vehicle accident; and
                                             
 (2) A copy of the citation or other charging document, if a
citation or other charging document was issued to the person; or
                                             
 (3) A written report of the incident, if a citation or other
charging document was not issued to the person.
                                             
 III. The department shall:
                                             
 (a) File each vehicle accident report, citation or other charging
document, and incident report that the department receives under this
section.
                                             
 (b) Keep convenient records or make suitable notations showing:
                                             
 (1) Conviction; and
                                             
 (2) Vehicle accident.
                                             
 (c) Send a copy of each document and record received under this
section to the Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Office of Foreign
Missions, United States Department of State.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit or limit the
application of any other provision of law to a person who has or claims
immunities or privileges under Title 22, Chapter 6 of the United States
Code.

**Source.** 2001, 150:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

Nonresident Violator Compact
----------------------------

### Section 262:29

 **262:29 Agreement Authorized. –** The director is authorized and
directed to execute all documents and perform all other acts necessary
to enter into and carry out the provisions of the nonresident violator
compact.

**Source.** RSA 264-B:1. 1979, 358:7. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:30

 **262:30 Entry Into Compact and Withdrawal. –**
                                             
 I. Entry into the compact shall be made by a resolution of
ratification executed by the director and submitted to the chairman of
the board of compact administrators.
                                             
 II. The effective date of entry shall be specified by the director,
but it shall not be less than 60 days after notice has been given by the
chairman of the board of compact administrators or by the secretariat of
the board to each party jurisdiction that the resolution from the
director has been received.
                                             
 III. The director may withdraw from this compact by official written
notice to the other party jurisdictions, but a withdrawal shall not take
effect until 90 days after notice of withdrawal is given. The notice
shall be directed to the compact administrator of each member
jurisdiction.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of this compact shall not apply to parking or
standing violations, highway weight limit violations, and violations of
law governing the transportation of hazardous materials.
                                             
 V. The compact shall be known as the nonresident violator compact of
1977.

**Source.** RSA 264-B:2. 1979, 358:7. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

Abandoned Vehicles
------------------

### Section 262:31

 **262:31 Authority to Take. –** An authorized official may take a
vehicle into his or her custody and may cause the same to be taken away
and stored at some suitable place only as provided in this subdivision.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:1. RSA 266:1. 1981, 146:1; 361:1, 3.
2010, 344:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:32

 **262:32 Reasons for Removal and Impoundment. –** An authorized
official may cause the removal and storage of a vehicle if he has
reasonable grounds to believe that:
                                             
 I. A vehicle has been left unattended on the paved portion of a toll
road, turnpike, or interstate and defense highway for a period of
greater than 4 hours;
                                             
 II. A vehicle has been left unattended on any way or the
right-of-way thereof for a period of greater than 24 hours;
                                             
 III. A vehicle is obstructing any way or the access thereto, or
access to a public building, or is or will be a menace to traffic if
allowed to remain, or is obstructing snow removal or highway maintenance
operations;
                                             
 IV. The owner or legal occupant of private property has complained
that a vehicle is obstructing the passage of vehicles from a public
street or highway onto the driveway of such private property;
                                             
 V. A vehicle is reported stolen, or is apparently abandoned, or
without proper registration, or apparently unsafe to be driven;
                                             
 VI. The owner or custodian of the vehicle is under arrest or
otherwise incapacitated, and the vehicle will be a menace to traffic if
permitted to remain; or
                                             
 VII. A vehicle has been left unattended within a state-owned park
and ride facility for a period of greater than 21 days.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:1. RSA 266:1. 1981, 146:1; 361:1, 3.
2006, 254:3. 2008, 210:3, eff. Aug. 15, 2008.

### Section 262:33

 **262:33 Procedure for Removal and Impoundment. –**
                                             
 I. Upon satisfying the requirements of RSA 262:32, such vehicle may
be removed and stored in a suitable place, and all reasonable charges
incurred as a result of such removal and storage shall be a lien against
the vehicle which shall be paid by the owner, custodian, or person
claiming such vehicle, except as otherwise provided in this section.
                                             
 II. Whenever a vehicle is towed pursuant to RSA 262:32 the owner or
other person lawfully entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall be
entitled to recover said vehicle and release of the above lien by
payment of all reasonable towing and storage charges. If the owner or
other person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle wishes to
challenge whether there was sufficient grounds for towing and
impoundment, he or she may pay over to the custodian of the vehicle an
amount equal to the towing and storage charges to secure the release of
such vehicle, and, within 15 days of the towing and impoundment, request
in writing a hearing.
                                             
 III. The hearing shall be held before the head of the law
enforcement agency which employs the authorized official who caused the
vehicle to be removed and stored, or his or her designee. In the event
such agency head or his or her designee determines sufficient grounds
did not exist for the removal and storage of the vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall reimburse the owner or other person lawfully
claiming possession for any amount paid to the custodian to secure
release of the vehicle.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall prevent a review of the
reasonableness of the towing or other action as may be permitted by laws
of this state by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:3, 4. RSA 266:3, 4. 1981, 146:1; 361:1,
3. 2010, 344:2, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:34

 **262:34 Notice of Removal. –** Whenever an authorized official or
the owner or person in lawful possession of private property directs the
removal and storage of a vehicle as permitted in this subdivision, he
shall, if he knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records
of the division the name and address of record of the registered owner
of the vehicle, attempt to give or have given by the most practicable
means, notice of the fact of such removal and the place to which said
vehicle has been removed. If the authorized official does not know and
is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason
is unable to give notice to the owner as provided in this section, such
notice shall be filed with the director, which notice shall be placed on
file by said director and open to public inspection.

**Source.** 1981, 361:1, 3. 1989, 253:8, eff. July 25, 1989.

### Section 262:35

 **262:35 Exemption From Liability. –** No custodian shall be liable
for damages to such vehicle while it is in his or her custody, providing
due care is exercised to prevent negligent acts.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:2. RSA 266:2. 1981, 146:1; 361:1, 3.
2010, 344:3, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:35-a

 **262:35-a Review of Fees for Removal and Impoundment. –**
                                             
 I. All fees charged for the removal and storage of any vehicle
caused to be removed by an authorized official pursuant to RSA 262:32 or
RSA 262:40-a shall be reasonable, and may reflect market variables,
including, but not limited to, distance traveled to and from the storage
facility, vehicle size and weight, the amount of time needed to remove
and store the vehicle, any special equipment needed, and personnel
costs. If the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of
the vehicle wishes to challenge the reasonableness of the fee charged,
the owner or other person may pay over to the custodian of the vehicle
an amount equal to the towing and storage charges to secure the release
of the vehicle, and, within 15 days of the release of the vehicle,
request in writing a review by the commissioner of safety. The
commissioner of safety or designee shall review the claim to determine
if there are sufficient grounds to conduct a hearing to determine
whether the charge was reasonable. If the commissioner or designee
determines that a hearing is necessary, the hearing shall be scheduled
by the bureau of hearings within 20 days after review by the
commissioner, at which time the extent of removal and storage fees shall
be determined. The commissioner or designee shall approve or disapprove
of the decision of the bureau of hearings within 7 days after the
hearing was held. Notwithstanding RSA 262:25, any person aggrieved by a
decision of the commissioner or designee under this section may appeal
the decision to the superior court in the same manner as that prescribed
in RSA 263:75, II and III. If no request for review is filed within the
15-day period, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession
of the vehicle shall be deemed to have waived all rights to review under
this section and shall be liable for the total amount billed.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall prevent a review of the
reasonableness of the towing or other action as may be permitted by laws
of this state by a court of competent jurisdiction.
                                             
 III. Any time that a person is storing a vehicle pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision, the person may remove any items from
within the vehicle that are not a part of or accessories to the vehicle.
The person may hold any such items, other than wallets, purses, life
essential clothing, mail, legal documents, car seats, eyeglasses,
medicine, medical equipment, or house keys pending payment of any fees
due under this subdivision. If fees remain unpaid after 20 days, the
person may dispose of the items.

**Source.** 2001, 213:1. 2003, 119:1. 2010, 344:4, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:36

 **262:36 Notice to Director. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 253:9, I, eff.
July 25, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 262:36-a

 **262:36-a Disposal by Storage Company. –**
                                             
 I. If the owner of a motor vehicle removed or stored pursuant to RSA
262:33 or RSA 262:40-a does not claim the vehicle within 20 days, and
the vehicle is more than 5 model years old at the time of removal, the
storage company may dispose of such vehicle after giving notice pursuant
to RSA 262:38, provided that no notice by publication shall be
required.
                                             
 II. If the vehicle is 5 model years old or less at the time of
removal and the vehicle has not been claimed within 30 days, the storage
company may dispose of such vehicle after giving notice pursuant to RSA
262:38.
                                             
 III. If the value of the vehicle is less than 
                                             $1,000 or the vehicle
is so vandalized, damaged, or in disrepair as to be unusable as a motor
vehicle and only fit for salvage as determined in good faith through the
application of reasonable automotive industry standards, the storage
facility may dispose of the vehicle in 15 days without the notice
required by RSA 262:38 and RSA 444. If the last place of abode of the
owner of such vehicle is known to or may be ascertained by such storage
facility by the exercise of reasonable diligence, the storage facility
shall give notice of the time and place of the sale to the owner by
verified mail as defined in RSA 451-C:1, VII, or in person, at least 10
days prior to the disposal and upon written notice to the director
subject to such rules as the department shall adopt pursuant to RSA
541-A.
                                             
 IV. If the towing or storage facility has knowledge or has been
notified that the owner of the vehicle is hospitalized or incarcerated
as a result of an accident, the time allowed for claiming the vehicle
under paragraph I shall be extended for an additional 14 days or until
the person has been released from the medical facility or place of
incarceration, whichever occurs first.

**Source.** 1989, 253:5. 2010, 344:5. 2012, 207:4, eff. Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 262:37

 **262:37 Sale Authorized. –** If the vehicle shall have been stored
pursuant to this subdivision and all the requirements of RSA 262:36-a
have been met, the custodian of the vehicle may sell the same, at the
custodian's place of business at public auction, for cash.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:6. RSA 266:6. 1981, 146:1; 361:1, 3.
1989, 253:6. 2010, 344:6, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:37-a

 **262:37-a Access to Records. –** The custodian of the vehicle may
obtain the name and last known mailing address of the last registered
owner of a vehicle stored pursuant to this subdivision, and a law
enforcement officer with jurisdiction, upon request of the operator of a
tow truck, shall give to the tow truck operator, upon receipt of such
information, the name and mailing address of the registered owner of the
vehicle if the owner or custodian of the vehicle was not present or able
to give that information at the scene. If the law enforcement officer is
aware that the owner or custodian of the vehicle was removed to a
medical or correctional facility, the law enforcement officer shall
notify the tow truck operator of that fact.

**Source.** 2010, 344:7, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:38

 **262:38 Notice of Sale. –** Notice of sale shall be given by
posting notices thereof in 2 or more public places in the town or city
where the property is stored, at least 14 days before the sale and, if
the current retail value of the vehicle exceeds 
                                             $1,000, as determined
in good faith and by a credible method, by publishing the notice at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area. If the
last place of abode of the owner of such vehicle is known to or may be
ascertained by such garage owner or keeper by the exercise of reasonable
diligence, a notice of the time and place of the sale shall be given by
the garage owner by registered or certified mail, or in person, at least
10 days prior to the sale.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:7. RSA 266:7. 1981, 146:1; 361:1, 3.
2010, 344:8, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:39

 **262:39 Application of Proceeds. –** The balance of the proceeds of
sale, if any, after payment of the amount of the liens and the
reasonable expenses incident to the sale, shall be paid to the owner of
such vehicle or his legal representative if claimed at any time within
one year from the date of sale. If such balance shall not be claimed
within said period, it shall be paid into the state treasury for the use
of the state.

**Source.** 1931, 83:1. RL 121:8. RSA 266:8. 1981, 146:1; 361:1, 3, eff.
Jan. 1, 1982 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 262:40

 **262:40 Vehicles Involved in Crimes. –** Whenever a vehicle is
reasonably believed to have been used in connection with a criminal
offense, and a peace officer has ordered the removal and impoundment of
such vehicle, the custodian of said vehicle shall release it upon
authorization of the removing agency or a court of competent
jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1981, 361:1, 3, eff. Jan. 1, 1982 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 262:40-a

 **262:40-a Vehicles Removed From Private and State Property;
Conspicuous Notice in Parking Lots and Garages. –**
                                             
 I. The owner or person in lawful possession of any private property
or the manager of a state-owned park and ride facility on which a
vehicle is parked without permission or is apparently abandoned may:
                                             
 (a) Cause the removal of the vehicle in a reasonable manner
provided he or she gives notice of such removal to a peace officer as
soon as reasonably possible; or
                                             
 (b) Notify a peace officer that he or she wishes to have such a
vehicle removed from the property, whereupon the peace officer or
another authorized official shall cause the removal of such vehicle
pursuant to the removal, impoundment, and notice procedures required by
this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The department of transportation shall give authorized persons
permission to remove vehicles which are abandoned, as described in RSA
262:32, at state-owned park and rides.
                                             
 III. The department of transportation shall give authorized persons
permission to move any vehicle within a state-owned park and ride
facility when such vehicle is improperly parked in a bus storage or
travel lane which is properly marked. The owner of the vehicle shall be
responsible for the costs of moving the vehicle.
                                             
 IV. The costs of removing a vehicle under this section, including
reasonable towing and storage costs, shall, consistent with RSA
262:35-a, be the responsibility of the last registered owner according
to department records, unless said last registered owner is able to
establish a transfer of ownership to some other person prior to
abandonment or that the vehicle was reported stolen to a law enforcement
agency at the time of abandonment, in which case the last owner shall be
liable. If a vehicle is towed from a parking lot or parking garage,
charges for removal and storage shall not be assessed against the
vehicle owner unless there is posted in the parking lot or parking
garage conspicuous notice that illegally parked vehicles are subject to
towing at the owner's expense.
                                             
 V. Any police department which receives a request to have a vehicle
removed or receives notice of a removal as provided in this section
shall maintain a log of such requests and notices.

**Source.** 1981, 361:1, 3. 1989, 253:2. 1994, 295:1. 2006, 254:1, 2.
2007, 175:1. 2008, 210:4, 5. 2010, 344:9, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 262:40-b

 **262:40-b Unclaimed Vehicles. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 253:9, II, eff.
July 25, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 262:40-c

 **262:40-c Abandoning a Vehicle; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall abandon a motor vehicle, registered or
unregistered, on any way or on any property other than his or her own
without the permission of the owner or lessee of said property or, in
the case of public property, of the police department having
jurisdiction over the property and no person shall abandon a vehicle at
a storage facility after being notified in person or by registered or
certified mail to redeem the vehicle. For the purposes of this section,
a vehicle shall be considered abandoned if it has been left for more
than 24 hours without the appropriate permission being given or at a
storage facility after having been given 10 days' notice to redeem it.
                                             
 II. A storage facility to which an abandoned vehicle has been towed
may dispose of such vehicle after complying with the notice requirements
of RSA 262:36-a or RSA 262:38, as applicable. It shall be a rebuttable
resumption that the notice was received if it was given pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 III. The last owner of record of a motor vehicle found abandoned, as
shown by the files of the department, shall be deemed prima facie to
have been the owner of such motor vehicle at the time it was abandoned
and to have been the person who abandoned the motor vehicle or caused or
procured its abandonment, unless said last registered owner is able to
establish a transfer of ownership prior to abandonment, in which case
the transferee shall be liable, or that the vehicle had been reported
stolen to a law enforcement agency at the time of abandonment.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of not less than

                                             $100 and not more than 
                                             $500 plus penalty assessment, and may be
subject to the loss of driver's license or driving privilege and
registration or privilege of registering as provided in RSA 263:56 and
RSA 261:179.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of safety or designee may assess costs of
abandoning a vehicle, including but not limited to, reasonable towing,
processing, disposal, and storage costs, against any person convicted of
abandoning a vehicle in violation of this section, and the director
shall, unless there is just cause to do otherwise, suspend the driver's
license or driving privilege, and registration or privilege of
registering of any person who has not paid such costs.

**Source.** 1989, 253:3. 2003, 119:2. 2010, 344:10, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

Penalties and Court Appearances
-------------------------------

### Section 262:41

 **262:41 General Penalty. –** Unless otherwise provided in statute,
any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this title, or
of any rule made under authority thereof, shall be fined 
                                             $50 plus
penalty assessment for a first offense. For any subsequent offense
committed during any calendar year such person shall be fined 
                                             $100 plus
penalty assessment.

**Source.** 1921, 119:15. PL 102:21. RL 118:23. RSA 262:28. 1959, 155:1.
1973, 530:37. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982. 2015, 202:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 262:42

 **262:42 Placing Complaint on File. –** Except as herein otherwise
provided, a complaint against a person for the violation of any
provision of this title may be placed on file at the discretion of the
court, if the violation appears to have been unintentional, or if no
person or property could have been endangered thereby.

**Source.** 1905, 86:4. 1911, 133:26. 1913, 171:2. 1915, 129:8. 1917,
229:7. 1919, 161:6. 1921, 119:15, 25. PL 102:8, 22. RL 118:9, 24. 1947,
107:3. 1949, 189:9. 1953, 85:2, 3. RSA 262:11, 29. 1963, 184:1. 1965,
240:4, 5. 1971, 206:1; 478:3. 1973, 21:1; 320:3. 1974, 45:16. 1977,
96:1; 563:80, 81. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 262:42-a

 **262:42-a Prohibition on Placing on File or Masking Convictions
Incurred by Holders of Commercial Driver Licenses or Persons Required to
Hold Such Licenses. –** The court shall not place on file, mask, defer
imposition of judgment, or allow an individual to enter into a diversion
program that would prevent the conviction of a holder of a commercial
driver license, or a person required to hold a commercial driver
license, in any type of motor vehicle, of a state or local traffic
control law, except a parking violation, from appearing on the driver's
record, whether the driver was convicted for an offense committed in the
state where the driver is licensed or another state.

**Source.** 2008, 149:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 262:43

 **262:43 Appearance by Counsel or Others. –** Any person charged
with violation of the provisions of any law relative to the use and
driving of vehicles, except where the penalty involves imprisonment,
may, without personal appearance, appear by counsel or by any citizen of
good character in answer to said charge.

**Source.** 1953, 239:3; 260:3. RSA 262:37. 1981, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1982.

### Section 262:44

 **262:44 Waiver in Lieu of Court Appearance; Default. –** Any person
charged with a violation of the provisions of title XXI on vehicles,
excluding a violation of RSA 263:1-a, RSA 265:79, RSA 265-A:2, RSA
265-A:3, RSA 265:115, RSA 265:117, a speeding offense under RSA 265:60
for which the defendant must appear in court, and any offense which is a
misdemeanor or felony, may plead guilty, nolo contendere, or not guilty
by mail in the following manner:
                                             
 I. Such defendant shall receive, in addition to the summons, a
uniform fine schedule entitled "Notice of Fine, Division of Motor
Vehicles'' which shall contain the normal fines for violations of the
provisions of title XXI on vehicles for which a plea may be entered by
mail. The defendant shall be given a notice of fine indicating the
amount of the fine plus penalty assessment at the time the summons is
issued; except if, for cause, the summoning authority wishes the
defendant to appear personally. Defendants summoned to appear personally
shall do so on the arraignment date specified in the summons, unless
otherwise ordered by the court. Defendants who are issued a summons and
notice of fine and who wish to plead guilty or nolo contendere shall
enter their plea on the summons and return it with payment of the fine
plus penalty assessment to the director of the division of motor
vehicles within 30 days of the date of the summons. The director of the
division of motor vehicles may accept payment of the fine by credit card
in lieu of cash payment. Any transaction costs assessed by the issuer of
the credit card shall be paid out of the portion of the fine amount
which is credited as agency income and not out of the penalty assessment
charged by the district court. The director of the division of motor
vehicles shall remit the penalty assessments collected to the state
treasurer to be credited and continually appropriated to the state
general fund and to the victims' assistance fund and the judicial branch
information technology fund in the percentages and manner prescribed in
RSA 188-F:31. Fines shall be paid over to the state treasurer, and shall
be credited as agency income by the department of safety within 14 days
of their receipt and shall not lapse to the general fund until the
second year of each biennium.
                                             
 II. If the defendant wishes to enter a not guilty plea, he shall
enter such plea on the summons and return it to the division of motor
vehicles within 30 days of the date of the summons. The division shall
transmit the plea to the appropriate court and the court shall schedule
a trial. Upon the conclusion of the trial, the court shall transmit the
result of the trial to the division for division records.
                                             
 III. (a) Whenever a defendant:
                                             
 (1) Does not enter a plea-by-mail with the director of the
division of motor vehicles within 30 days of the date of the summons or,
if required to appear in court personally, does not appear personally or
by counsel at the court on or before the required date or move for a
continuance; or
                                             
 (2) Fails to pay a fine or other penalty in connection with a
conviction of a title XXI offense or payment of such fine or other
penalty is uncollectible or unacceptable pursuant to RSA 6:11-a, the
defendant shall be defaulted. In cases where the defendant has failed to
enter a plea-by-mail with the director, the director of designee shall
determine what the fine would be upon a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere and shall impose an administrative processing fee in addition
to the fine and penalty assessment. In cases where the defendant has
defaulted on a court obligation, the court shall determine what the fine
would be upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and shall impose an
administrative processing fee in addition to the fine and penalty
assessment. In any case, the defendant's driving privileges shall be
suspended as provided in RSA 263:56-a.
                                             
 (b) Whenever a defendant otherwise fails to appear for a
scheduled court appearance in connection with a summons for any
violation level offense for which a defendant may plea by mail, the
court shall proceed to hear the state's evidence, by offer of proof or
otherwise, and enter a finding in accordance therewith. If a finding of
guilty is made, the court shall set the fine, and the clerk shall mail
or deliver to the defendant's last known address a notice of finding and
imposition of fine form approved by the administrative justice of the
district court, appointed under supreme court rule. Payment in full
shall be required within 30 days from the date of the notice. Any
defendant who fails to make the payment shall be subject to the
provisions of RSA 262:44, III(a)(1)-(2). No finding made by the court
shall be set aside except for cause.
                                             
 (c) In defaulted court cases for violations of title XXI, the
court shall notify the director of the division of motor vehicles of the
defendant's default, and the amounts of the fine and other penalties, on
a form prescribed by the director or by electronic means. The amount of
the administrative processing fee shall be determined by the New
Hampshire supreme court in accordance with the provisions of RSA
502-A:19-b, V and shall be retained by the court for the benefit of the
state in those cases in which the fee is assessed by the court. In other
cases, the fee shall be retained by the department of safety for the
benefit of the state.
                                             
 IV. The court may, in its discretion, issue a bench warrant for the
arrest of any defendant who:
                                             
 (a) Has defaulted as provided in RSA 262:44, III; or
                                             
 (b) Fails to pay a fine or other penalty imposed in connection
with a conviction of any offense which a court has determined the
defendant is able to pay, or payment of a fine or other penalty is
uncollectible or unacceptable, pursuant to RSA 6:11-a; or
                                             
 (c) Fails to comply with a similar court order of the director or
a court on any matter within the director's or court's jurisdiction.
                                             
 V. For cause, the court in its discretion may refuse to accept a
plea by mail and may impose a fine other than that prescribed by the
uniform fine schedule. the court may order the defendant to appear
personally in court for the disposition of the case.
                                             
 VI. The uniform fine schedule referred to in paragraph I shall be
developed pursuant to RSA 502-A:19-b, V.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner of the department of safety shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the forms and procedures required for
the division of motor vehicles and department of safety to carry out
their duties and responsibilities under this section.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner of the department of safety shall make an
annual report 60 days after the close of each fiscal year to the fiscal
committee of the general court on fines and fines in default, paid and
unpaid, for each year beginning with 1993.

**Source.** RSA 262:37-a. 1975, 116:1. 1981, 146:1. 1992, 257:23. 1993,
140:1. 1999, 261:4. 2004, 183:2. 2006, 260:19. 2008, 223:2, 3; 237:6.
2009, 144:117. 2012, 247:26. 2013, 144:105, eff. July 1, 2013. 2016,
319:9, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 262:45

 **262:45 Oversight Commission on Motor Vehicle Fines. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an oversight commission on motor vehicle
fines. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Periodically review the fines for motor vehicle violations
established pursuant to RSA 502-A:19-b, V, considering the
appropriateness of the fine amounts and the advisability of raising or
lowering the fine amounts.
                                             
 (b) Study the public safety issues which affect the uniform fine
schedule by soliciting testimony from state and national experts.
                                             
 (c) Make recommendations for improving the system by which fines
are issued, contested, and paid.
                                             
 II. (a) The members of the oversight commission shall be as
follows:
                                             
 (1) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed
by the speaker of the house of representatives, one of whom shall be a
member of the standing committee having jurisdiction over criminal
justice and public safety, one of whom shall be a member of the standing
committee having jurisdiction over transportation, and one of whom shall
be a member of the standing committee having jurisdiction over ways and
means.
                                             
 (2) The administrative judge of the district court, or
designee.
                                             
 (3) One representative of the department of safety, appointed
by the commissioner.
                                             
 (4) The president of the New Hampshire Association of Chiefs
of Police, or designee.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the oversight commission shall receive
mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the
commission.
                                             
 (c) The terms of legislative members shall be coterminous with
their terms of office. Legislative members may be reappointed consistent
with the requirements of subparagraph II(a)(1).
                                             
 III. The members of the oversight commission shall elect a
chairperson from among the members every 2 years.
                                             
 IV. The first meeting of the commission established in RSA 262:45
shall be called by the first-named house member. The first meeting of
the commission shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of
this section. Three members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum.
                                             
 V. The oversight commission shall make a report every 2 years
beginning on November 1, 2009, together with its findings and any
recommendations for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, the house clerk, the
senate clerk, the governor, and the state library.

**Source.** 2008, 305:1. 2009, 199:4, eff. July 15, 2009.
