---
title: CHAPTER 267 NEW ENGLAND TRUCKERS COMPACT
---

TITLE XXI
                                             
MOTOR VEHICLES
==============

CHAPTER 267
                                             
NEW ENGLAND TRUCKERS COMPACT
----------------------------

### Section 267:1

 **267:1 Compact. –** The governor of this state is hereby authorized
to execute a compact on behalf of the state of New Hampshire with any
one or more of the states of Vermont, Maine, Massachusetts, Connecticut
and Rhode Island and the general court hereby signifies in advance its
approval and ratification of such compact, so entered into, such
approval and ratification to be effective as herein set forth:
                                             
 Whereas, the Vermont General Assembly, during the 1981 session,
enacted into law, legislation creating a system of truck entry fees;
and
                                             
 Whereas, the New Hampshire General Court followed suit by enacting
similar legislation; and
                                             
 Whereas, the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts has
adopted a resolution calling for retaliatory truck entry fees in
response to the action of the Vermont and New Hampshire Legislatures;
and
                                             
 Whereas, at its January 1982 meeting in which members of the Vermont
Senate and House of Representatives participated, the Caucus of New
England State legislatures approved the following compact agreement;
now, therefore, the state of New Hampshire enters into the following
compact subject to the terms and conditions therein stated.

**COMPACT AGREEMENT**


                                             
 An act relative to interstate commerce:
                                             
 Section 1. The "New England State Interstate Trucking Fee Compact''
is entered into with all other New England states joining therein in the
following form for the purpose of establishing a compact among the six
New England states with the intention to develop a single identification
device encompassing fuel and regulatory fees and to prohibit the
imposition of any truck entry fees.

**Article One**


                                             
 This agreement shall become effective within any New England state
at any time as prescribed by that state, and shall become effective
within those states ratifying it whenever any of the six states of
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and
Vermont have ratified.

**Article Two**


                                             
 The State of New Hampshire hereby requests and urges the several New
England states to refuse to adopt, or if they have been adopted, to
repeal, any truck entry fees.

**Article Three**


                                             
 A state may become a party to this compact by enacting, and
continuing to enforce, a law or laws which move(s) toward uniformity
among the six New England states.

**Article Four**


                                             
 In every participating state for each licensed motor vehicle with an
empty weight of 7,500 lbs. or more and/or a gross vehicle weight of
18,000 lbs. or more, the commercial user shall apply to the
administrator for a highway user license and pay an annual fee as
determined by each compact state in which the motor vehicle may operate.
The license shall remain in effect until surrendered or revoked. The
appropriate administrators of the respective states shall, in addition,
provide identification devices to each licensed commercial user. One
such device must be displayed on the left side of each licensed motor
vehicle. Identification devices shall be issued annually by the
administrators of the respective states and shall be displayed on or
before January 1 of each year.

**Article Five**


                                             
 Appropriate legislation will be introduced and enacted which will
authorize the appropriate officials of each state or commonwealth to
negotiate with their counterparts in other states or commonwealths to
enter into a compact providing for the cooperative collection and
reciprocal enforcement of the highway user fees imposed by the several
states and commonwealths.

**Article Six**


                                             
 Any state joining herein may, upon sixty days notice, withdraw
herefrom. The duly authorized representatives of the signatory states
having signed this agreement in a single original, it shall be deposited
in the archives of the Department of State of the United States, and a
duly certified copy shall be forwarded to the Governor and to each House
of the Legislature of the signatory states.
                                             
 This compact shall become effective when ratified and approved as
provided in Article I of this compact and when it is approved by the
United States Congress.

**Source.** 1983, 280:1, eff. June 18, 1983.
