---
title: CHAPTER 269 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
---

TITLE XXI
                                             
MOTOR VEHICLES
==============

CHAPTER 269
                                             
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
--------------------------------------------

### Section 269:1

 **269:1 Definition. –** In this chapter, "electric personal
assistive mobility device'' or "EPAMD'' shall mean a self-balancing, 2
non-tandem-wheeled device designed to transport only one person, solely
powered by an electric propulsion system, with a maximum speed of less
than 20 miles per hour.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:2

 **269:2 Applicable Law. –** An EPAMD shall not be considered a
"vehicle'' within the meaning of the law of this state.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:3

 **269:3 Equipment. –** An EPAMD shall be equipped with front, rear,
and side reflectors; a system that when employed will enable the
operator to bring the device to a controlled stop; and, if the EPAMD is
operated between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, a
lamp emitting a white light which, while the EPAMD is in motion,
sufficiently illuminates the area in front of the operator.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:4

 **269:4 Operation Permitted on Sidewalks and Roadways. –** An
operator of an EPAMD shall have the rights and duties of pedestrians
prescribed in RSA 265:34-40.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:5

 **269:5 Special Rules for Operation. –**
                                             
 I. A person operating an EPAMD on a sidewalk or roadway, shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with, and shall yield the
right-of-way to, persons traveling on foot.
                                             
 II. No EPAMD shall be operated at a speed greater than 15 miles per
hour.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:6

 **269:6 Parking. –**
                                             
 I. An EPAMD may be parked on a sidewalk unless prohibited or
restricted by an official traffic control device.
                                             
 II. An EPAMD shall not be parked on a roadway in such a manner as to
prevent the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
                                             
 III. In all other respects, any person operating an EPAMD shall
conform with provisions of law regulating the parking of vehicles.
                                             
 IV. All violations of parking restrictions shall be deemed the
responsibility of the owner of the EPAMD. The owner shall be presumed to
be in control of the EPAMD at the time of the parking violation, and no
evidence of actual control or culpability need be proved as an element
of the offense.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:7

 **269:7 Hazardous Materials. –** No person shall carry or transport
on an EPAMD hazardous materials.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:8

 **269:8 Additional Regulations. –** A city or town shall have the
authority to regulate the operation of EPAMDs within its limits. The
provisions of RSA 269:3, 269:4, and 269:5 shall not supersede the
provisions of any local ordinance.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.

### Section 269:9

 **269:9 Violation. –** Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 2002, 4:3, eff. Feb. 15, 2002.
