---
title: 'CHAPTER 471-C CUSTODY AND ESCHEAT OF UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY'
---

TITLE XLVI
                                             
LOST PROPERTY; STRAYS
=====================

CHAPTER 471-C
                                             
CUSTODY AND ESCHEAT OF UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 471-C:1

 **471-C:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, unless the
context otherwise requires:
                                             
 I. "Administrator'' means the state treasurer, or designee.
                                             
 II. "Apparent owner'' means the person whose name appears on the
records of the holder as the person entitled to property held, issued,
or owing by the holder.
                                             
 III. "Attorney general'' means the chief legal officer of this
state.
                                             
 IV. "Banking organization'' means a bank, trust company, savings
bank, industrial bank, land bank, safe deposit company, private banker,
or any organization defined by other law as a bank or banking
organization.
                                             
 V. "Business association'' means a non-public corporation, joint
stock company, investment company, business trust, partnership, or
association for business purposes of 2 or more individuals, whether or
not for profit, including a banking organization, financial
organization, insurance company, or utility.
                                             
 VI. "Domicile'' means the state of incorporation of a corporation
and the state of the principal place of business of an incorporated
person.
                                             
 VII. "Escheat'', except in RSA 471-C:30, means the presumption of
abandonment of property followed by:
                                             
 (a) Immediate proceedings for the taking of title; or
                                             
 (b) The required delivery to the state followed by immediate
proceedings for the taking of title; or
                                             
 (c) Completion of proceedings in RSA 471-C:30 followed by payment
or delivery of property to the appropriate county treasurer.
                                             
 VIII. "Financial organization'' means a savings and loan
association, cooperative bank, building and loan association, or credit
union.
                                             
 IX. "Holder'' means a person, wherever organized or domiciled, who
is:
                                             
 (a) In possession of property belonging to another;
                                             
 (b) A trustee; or
                                             
 (c) Indebted to another on an obligation.
                                             
 X. "Insurance company'' means an association, corporation, fraternal
or mutual benefit organization, whether or not for profit, which is
engaged in providing insurance coverage, including accident, burial,
casualty, credit life, contract performance, dental, fidelity, fire,
health, hospitalization, illness, life, including endowments and
annuities, malpractice, marine, mortgage, surety, and protection
insurance.
                                             
 XI. "Intangible property'' includes:
                                             
 (a) Moneys, checks, drafts, deposits, interest, dividends, and
income;
                                             
 (b) Credit balances, customer overpayments, gift certificates,
security deposits, refunds, credit memos, unpaid wages, unused airline
tickets, and unidentified remittances;
                                             
 (c) Stocks and other intangible ownership interests in business
associations;
                                             
 (d) Moneys deposited to redeem stocks, bonds, coupons, and other
securities, or to make distributions;
                                             
 (e) Amounts due and payable under the terms of insurance
policies, except amounts due under claims instruments which require
acceptance by the claimant or which, by their terms, are void if not
presented within a definite time; and
                                             
 (f) Amounts distributable from a trust or custodial fund
established under a plan to provide health, welfare, pension, vacation,
severance, retirement, death, stock purchase, profit sharing, employee
savings, supplemental unemployment insurance, or similar benefits.
                                             
 XII. "Last known address'' means a description of the location of
the apparent owner sufficient for the purpose of the delivery of mail.
                                             
 XIII. "Owner'' means a depositor in the case of a deposit, a
beneficiary in case of a trust other than a deposit in trust, a
creditor, claimant, or payee in the case of other intangible property,
or a person having a legal or equitable interest in property subject to
this chapter or his legal representative.
                                             
 XIV. "Person'' means an individual, business association, state or
other government, governmental subdivision or agency, public authority,
estate, trust, 2 or more persons having a joint or common interest, or
any other legal or commercial entity.
                                             
 XV. "State'' means any state, district, commonwealth, territory,
insular possession, or any other area subject to the legislative
authority of the United States.
                                             
 XVI. "Utility'' means a person who owns or operates for public use
any plant, equipment, property, franchise, or license for the
transmission of communications or the production, storage, transmission,
sale, delivery, or furnishing of electricity, water, steam, or gas.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:1. 1995, 84:2, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:2

 **471-C:2 Property Presumed Abandoned. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all intangible
property, including any income or increment derived from it, less any
lawful charges, that is held, issued, or owing in the ordinary course of
a holder's business and has remained unclaimed by the owner for more
than 5 years after it became payable or distributable is presumed
abandoned.
                                             
 II. Property is payable or distributable for the purpose of this
chapter notwithstanding the owner's failure to make demand or to present
any instrument or document required to receive payment.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 295:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 471-C:3

 **471-C:3 General Conditions Precedent to Presumption of
Abandonment. –** Unless otherwise provided, intangible property is
subject to the custody of this state as unclaimed property if the
conditions raising a presumption of abandonment under RSA 471-C:2 or RSA
471-C:5-18 are satisfied and:
                                             
 I. The last known address, as shown on the records of the holder, of
the apparent owner is in this state;
                                             
 II. The records of the holder do not reflect the identity of the
person entitled to the property and it is established that the last
known address of the person entitled to the property is in this state;
                                             
 III. The records of the holder do not reflect the last known address
of the apparent owner, and it is established that:
                                             
 (a) The last known address of the person entitled to the property
is in this state; or
                                             
 (b) The holder is a domiciliary or a government or governmental
subdivision or agency of this state and has not previously paid or
delivered the property to the state of the last known address of the
apparent owner or other person entitled to the property;
                                             
 IV. The last known address, as shown on the records of the holder,
of the apparent owner is in a state that does not provide by law for the
escheat or custodial taking of the property and the holder is a
domiciliary or a government or governmental subdivision or agency of
this state;
                                             
 V. The last known address, as shown on the records of the holder, of
the apparent owner is in a foreign nation and the holder is a
domiciliary or a government or governmental subdivision or agency of
this state; or
                                             
 VI. The transaction out of which the property arose occurred in this
state; and
                                             
 (a) The last known address of the apparent owner or other person
entitled to the property is in a state that does not provide by law for
the escheat or custodial taking of the property or its escheat or
unclaimed property law is not applicable to the property; and
                                             
 (b) The holder is a domiciliary of a state that does not provide
by law for the escheat or custodial taking of the property or its
escheat or unclaimed property law is not applicable to the property.
                                             
 VII. (a) Unless otherwise provided by law, intangible property is
subject to the custody of this state as unclaimed property awaiting
claim by another state pursuant to RSA 471-C:27, I(b), if the conditions
raising a presumption of abandonment under RSA 471-C:2 or RSA 471-C:5-18
are satisfied and the last known address of the apparent owner, as shown
on the records of the holder, is in another state.
                                             
 (b) Tangible and intangible property awaiting claim by another
state pursuant to RSA 471-C:27, I(b) shall be reported to the
administrator, subject to the dormancy periods set forth in this
chapter, in accordance with the requirements of RSA 471-C:19.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1988, 256:1. 1999, 212:1, eff. Sept. 4, 1999.

### Section 471-C:3-a

 **471-C:3-a Abandoned Intangible Property. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008,
120:34, III, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 471-C:4

 **471-C:4 Travelers Checks and Money Orders. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to paragraph IV, any sum payable on a travelers check
that has been outstanding for more than 15 years after its issuance is
presumed abandoned unless the owner, within 15 years, has communicated
in writing with the issuer concerning it or otherwise indicated an
interest as evidenced by a memorandum or other record on file prepared
by an employee of the issuer.
                                             
 II. Subject to paragraph IV, any sum payable on a money order or
similar written instrument, other than a third-party check, that has
been outstanding for more than 7 years after its issuance is presumed
abandoned unless the owner, within 7 years, has communicated in writing
with the issuer concerning it or otherwise indicated an interest as
evidenced by a memorandum or other record on file prepared by an
employee of the issuer.
                                             
 III. A holder may not deduct from the amount of a travelers check or
money order any charge imposed by reason of the failure to present the
instrument for payment unless there is a valid and enforceable written
contract between the issuer and the owner of the instrument pursuant to
which the issuer may impose a charge and the issuer regularly imposes
such charges and does not regularly reverse or otherwise cancel them.
                                             
 IV. No sum payable on a travelers check, money order, or similar
written instrument, other than a third-party bank check, described in
paragraphs I and II may be subjected to the custody of this state as
unclaimed property unless:
                                             
 (a) The records of the issuer show that the travelers check,
money order, or similar written instrument was purchased in this state;
                                             
 (b) The issuer has its principal place of business in this state
and the records of the issuer do not show the state in which the
travelers check, money order, or similar written instrument was
purchased; or
                                             
 (c) The issuer has its principal place of business in this state,
the records of the issuer show the state in which the travelers check,
money order, or similar written instrument was purchased and the laws of
the state of purchase do not provide for the escheat or custodial taking
of the property or its escheat or unclaimed property law is not
applicable to the property.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, paragraph IV
applies to sums payable on travelers checks, money orders, and similar
written instruments presumed abandoned on or after February 1, 1965,
except to the extent that those sums have been paid over to a state
prior to January 1, 1974.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:5

 **471-C:5 Checks, Drafts and Similar Instruments Issued or Certified
by Banking and Financial Organizations. –**
                                             
 I. Any sum payable on a check, draft, or similar instrument, except
those subject to RSA 471-C:4 on which a banking or financial
organization is directly liable, including a cashier's check and a
certified check, which has been outstanding for more than 5 years after
it was payable or after its issuance if payable on demand, is presumed
abandoned, unless the owner, within 5 years, has communicated in writing
with the banking or financial organization concerning it or otherwise
indicated an interest as evidenced by a memorandum or other record on
file prepared by an employee thereof.
                                             
 II. A holder may not deduct from the amount of any instrument
subject to this section any charge imposed by reason of the failure to
present the instrument for payment unless there is a valid and
enforceable written contract between the holder and the owner of the
instrument pursuant to which the holder may impose a charge, and the
holder regularly imposes such charges and does not regularly reverse or
otherwise cancel them.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 295:3, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 471-C:6

 **471-C:6 Bank Deposits and Funds in Financial Organizations. –**
                                             
 I. Any demand, savings, or matured time deposit with a banking or
financial organization, including a deposit that is automatically
renewable, and any funds paid toward the purchase of a share, a mutual
investment certificate, or other interest in a banking or financial
organization is presumed abandoned unless the owner, within 5 years
has:
                                             
 (a) In the case of a deposit, increased or decreased its amount
or presented the passbook or other similar evidence of the deposit for
the crediting of interest;
                                             
 (b) Communicated in writing with the banking or financial
organization concerning the property;
                                             
 (c) Otherwise indicated an interest in the property as evidenced
by a memorandum or other record on file prepared by an employee of the
banking or financial organization;
                                             
 (d) Owned other property to which subparagraph (a), (b), or (c)
applies and if the banking or financial organization communicates in
writing with the owner with regard to the property that would otherwise
be presumed abandoned under this subparagraph at the address to which
communications regarding the other property regularly are sent; or
                                             
 (e) Had another relationship with the banking or financial
organization concerning which the owner has:
                                             
 (1) Communicated in writing with the banking or financial
organization; or
                                             
 (2) Otherwise indicated an interest as evidenced by a
memorandum or other record on file prepared by an employee or financial
organization and if the banking or financial organization communicates
in writing with the owner with regard to the property that would
otherwise be abandoned under this section at the address to which
communications regarding the other relationship regularly are sent.
                                             
 II. For purposes of paragraph I property includes interest and
dividends.
                                             
 III. A holder may not impose with respect to property described in
paragraph I any charge due to dormancy or inactivity or cease payment of
interest unless:
                                             
 (a) There is an enforceable written contract between the holder
and the owner of the property pursuant to which the holder may impose a
charge or cease payment of interest;
                                             
 (b) For property in excess of 
                                             $2, the holder, no more than 3
months before the initial imposition of those charges or cessation of
interest, has given written notice to the owner of the amount of those
charges at the last known address of the owner stating that those
charges will be imposed or that interest will cease, but the notice
provided in this section need not be given with respect to charges
imposed or interest ceased before January 1, 1987; and
                                             
 (c) The holder regularly imposes such charges or ceases payment
of interest and does not regularly reverse or otherwise cancel them or
retroactively credit interest with respect to the property.
                                             
 IV. Any property described in paragraph I that is automatically
renewable is matured for purposes of paragraph I upon the expiration of
its initial time period, but in the case of any renewal to which the
owner consents at or about the time of renewal by communicating in
writing with the banking or financial organization or otherwise
indicating consent as evidenced by a memorandum or other record on file
prepared by an employee of the organization, the property is matured
upon the expiration of the last time period for which consent was given.
If, at the time provided for delivery in paragraph I a penalty or
forfeiture in the payment of interest would result from the delivery of
the property, the time for delivery is extended until the time when no
penalty or forfeiture would result.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 295:4, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 471-C:7

 **471-C:7 Funds Owing Under Life Insurance Policies. –**
                                             
 I. Funds held or owing under any life or endowment insurance policy
or annuity contract that has matured or terminated are presumed
abandoned if unclaimed for more than 5 years after the funds became due
and payable as established from the records of the insurance company
holding or owing the funds, but property described in subparagraph
III(b) is presumed abandoned if unclaimed for more than 2 years.
                                             
 II. If a person other than the insured or annuitant is entitled to
the funds and an address of the person is not known to the company or it
is not definite and certain from the records of the company who is
entitled to the funds, it is presumed that the last known address of the
person entitled to the funds is the same as the last known address of
the insured or annuitant according to the records of the company.
                                             
 III. For the purposes of this chapter, a life or endowment insurance
policy or annuity contract not matured by actual proof of the death of
the insured or annuitant according to the records of the company is
matured and the proceeds due and payable if:
                                             
 (a) The company knows that the insured or annuitant has died; or
                                             
 (b) The insured has attained, or would have attained if the
insured were living, the limiting age under the mortality table on which
the reserve is based;
                                             
 (1) The policy was in force at the time the insured attained,
or would have attained, the limiting age specified in this subparagraph;
and
                                             
 (2) Neither the insured nor any other person appearing to have
an interest in the policy within the preceding 2 years, according to the
records of the company, has assigned, readjusted, or paid premiums on
the policy, subjected the policy to a loan, corresponded in writing with
the company concerning the policy, or otherwise indicated an interest as
evidenced by a memorandum or other record on file prepared by an
employee of the company.
                                             
 IV. For purposes of this chapter, the application of an automatic
premium loan provision or other nonforfeiture provision contained in an
insurance policy does not prevent a policy from being matured or
terminated under paragraph I if the insured or the beneficiary of the
policy otherwise has become entitled to the proceeds thereof before the
depletion of the cash surrender by the application of those provisions.
                                             
 V. If the laws of this state or the terms of the life insurance
policy require the company to give notice to the insured or owner that
an automatic premium loan provision or other nonforfeiture provision has
been exercised and the notice, given to an insured or owner whose last
known address according to the records of the company is in this state,
is undeliverable, the company shall make a reasonable search to
ascertain the policyholder's correct address to which the notice must be
mailed.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the company
learns of the death of the insured or annuitant and the beneficiary has
not communicated with the insurer within 4 months after the death, the
company shall take reasonable steps to pay the proceeds to the
beneficiary.
                                             
 VII. Commencing 2 years after January 1, 1987, every change of
beneficiary form issued by an insurance company under any life or
endowment insurance policy or annuity contract to an insured or owner
who is a resident of this state must request the following information:
                                             
 (a) The name of each beneficiary, or if a class of beneficiaries
is named, the name of each current beneficiary in the class;
                                             
 (b) The address of each beneficiary; and
                                             
 (c) The relationship of each beneficiary to the insured.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:3, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:7-a

 **471-C:7-a Unclaimed Demutualization Proceeds. –** Unclaimed
property payable or distributable in the course of a demutualization,
rehabilitation, or related reorganization of a mutual insurance company
is presumed abandoned 2 years after the date of demutualization, unless
the owner, during the 2 years following the date of demutualization, has
communicated with the insurance company either in writing or through
other communication which is evidenced by a contemporaneous record on
file with the insurance company, concerning the demutualization
proceeds.

**Source.** 2003, 218:5, eff. Aug. 30, 2003.

### Section 471-C:8

 **471-C:8 Deposits and Other Payments as Held by Utilities. –**
                                             
 I. A deposit, including any interest thereon, made by a subscriber
with a utility to secure payment or any sum paid for utility services
less any lawful deductions, that is due and owing but remains unclaimed
by the owner for more than one year after termination of the services
for which the deposit or payment was made is presumed abandoned.
                                             
 II. The public utilities commission may certify that a utility is
participating in a financial assistance program which assists the
utility's low income and disadvantaged customers with their utility
bill. Upon certification to the administrator, the utility shall pay 85
percent of the funds which would have been presumed to be abandoned
under paragraph I to the financial assistance program certified by the
public utilities commission. The utility shall remain obligated to file
its report of such abandoned property as required by RSA 471-C:19, and
shall remit the remaining 15 percent of the funds with the report
required under RSA 471-C:21, I to be used to compensate the
administrator for the costs of notice and publication under RSA
471-C:20.
                                             
 III. The provisions of paragraph II shall not apply to a public
utility operating or managing any plant or equipment or any part of the
same for the conveyance of telephone or telegraph messages.
                                             
 IV. Any public utility that operates any plant or equipment or any
part of same for the conveyance of telephone or telegraph messages shall
pay 85 percent of the funds which would have been presumed to be
abandoned under paragraph I to the public interest payphone fund
established under RSA 374:22-q. The utility shall remain obligated to
file its report of such abandoned property as required by RSA 471-C:19,
and shall remit the remaining 15 percent of the funds, together with the
report required under RSA 471-C:21, I, to be used to compensate the
administrator for the costs of notice and publication under RSA
471-C:20.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1994, 213:1. 2004, 132:3, eff. July 1, 2005.
2006, 266:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2006.

### Section 471-C:9

 **471-C:9 Refunds Held by Business Associations. –** Except to the
extent otherwise ordered by the court or administrative agency, any sum
that a business association has been ordered to refund by a court or
administrative agency which has remained unclaimed by the owner for more
than one year after it became payable in accordance with the final
determination or order providing for the refund, whether or not the
final determination or order requires any person entitled to a refund to
make a claim for it, is presumed abandoned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:10

 **471-C:10 Stock and Other Intangible Interests in Business
Associations. –**
                                             
 I. Stock or other equity interest in a business association other
than a consumers' cooperative association, is presumed abandoned 3 years
after the earliest of:
                                             
 (a) The date of the most recent dividend, stock split, or other
distribution unclaimed by the apparent owner; or
                                             
 (b) The date a statement of account or other notification or
communication was returned as undeliverable.
                                             
 II. Paragraph I applies to the underlying stock, share, or other
intangible ownership interest of an owner, as well as to the stock,
share, or other intangible ownership interest in dividend and
nondividend paying business associations whether or not the interest is
represented by a certificate. At the time the property is presumed
abandoned, any other property right accrued or accruing to the owner as
the result of the property interest and not previously presumed
abandoned, is also presumed abandoned.
                                             
 III. The running of the 3-year period of abandonment ceases
immediately if the apparent owner has:
                                             
 (a) Communicated in writing with the association regarding the
interest or a dividend, distribution, or other sum payable as a result
of the interest; or
                                             
 (b) Otherwise communicated with the association regarding the
interest or a dividend, distribution, or other sum payable as a result
of the interest, as evidenced by a memorandum or other record on file
with the association prepared by an employee or authorized agent of the
association.
                                             
 (c) Presented an instrument issued to pay interest or a dividend
or other cash distribution. If any future dividend, distribution, or
other sum payable to the owner as a result of the ownership interest is
subsequently not claimed by the owner a new period in which the property
is presumed abandoned commences and relates back only to the time a
subsequent dividend, distribution, or other sum became due and payable.
                                             
 IV. Any dividend, profit, distribution, interest, redemption,
payment on principal, or other sum held or owing by a business
association for or to its shareholder, certificate holder, member, or
holder of other equity interest who has not claimed it, or corresponded
in writing with the business association concerning it, within 3 years
after the date prescribed for payment or delivery, is presumed
unclaimed.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:16, I. 1995, 295:5-7. 2001, 197:6,
eff. Sept. 3, 2001. 2008, 120:27, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 471-C:11

 **471-C:11 Property of Business Associations Held in Course of
Dissolution. –** Intangible property distributable in the course of a
dissolution of a business association which remains unclaimed by the
owner for more than one year after the date specified for final
distribution is presumed abandoned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:12

 **471-C:12 Property Held by Agents and Fiduciaries. –**
                                             
 I. Intangible property and any income or increment derived therefrom
held in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of another person is
presumed abandoned unless the owner, within 5 years after it has become
payable or distributable, has increased or decreased the principal,
accepted payment of principal or income, communicated concerning the
property, or otherwise indicated an interest as evidenced by a
memorandum or other record on file prepared by the fiduciary.
                                             
 II. Funds in an individual retirement account or a retirement plan
for self-employed individuals or similar account or plan established
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of the United States are not
payable or distributable within the meaning of paragraph I unless, under
the terms of the account or plan, distribution of all or part of the
funds would then be mandatory.
                                             
 III. For the purpose of this section, a person who holds property as
an agent for a business association is deemed to hold the property in a
fiduciary capacity for that business association alone, unless the
agreement between such person and the business association provides
otherwise.
                                             
 IV. For the purposes of this chapter, a person who is deemed to hold
property in a fiduciary capacity for a business association alone is the
holder of the property only insofar as the interest of the business
association in the property is concerned, and the business association
is the holder of the property insofar as the interest of any other
person in the property is concerned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:4, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:13

 **471-C:13 Property Held in Police Department Property Rooms. –**
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, all
noncontraband abandoned or lost personal property which has a value of

                                             $250 or more and which has been held in a police department property
room for a period of at least 180 days, or which has a value of less
than 
                                             $250 and has been held for a period of at least 90 days, may be
disposed of by the police department by returning it to the finder, if
known, if the finder was other than a police officer who discovered the
property during the course of the police officer's usual police duties.
If the property cannot be returned to the finder, the property shall be
sold at public auction with the proceeds to be turned over to the town
or city treasurer. Except that any bicycle which has been held in a
police department property room for a period of 90 days or more shall be
sold at public auction with the proceeds to be used for the support of
local bicycle safety programs, or, if no local bicycle safety programs
are available, then with the consent of the local governing body, to be
used for any other purpose. The police department shall be relieved of
all liability for any claim thereafter arising or made with respect to
property disposed of under this section. A good faith judgment of the
value of the property by the police department shall be determinative
for purposes of this section.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:5; 295:18. 2000, 237:2, eff. June 6,
2000. 2005, 48:1, eff. July 22, 2005.

### Section 471-C:13-a

 **471-C:13-a Property Held in Airport Property Rooms. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, an
airport director or designee may dispose of all noncontraband abandoned
or lost property that has been held in an airport property room for a
period of 180 days and not claimed by the owner. If the owner is unknown
or if the owner fails to claim the property within 60 days of being
notified to claim the property, the airport director or designee may:
                                             
 (a) Destroy abandoned or lost property which may contain personal
or business information, or property which has a value of less than

                                             $25.
                                             
 (b) Return currency to an identified finder. The identified
finder shall claim the currency within 60 days of being notified to
claim the currency, otherwise said currency shall be retained by the
airport for its use in aeronautical activities.
                                             
 II. (a) An airport director or designee may dispose of all
noncontraband abandoned or lost property that has been held in an
airport property room for a period of 180 days which the airport
director or his or her designee has not been able to dispose of under
paragraph I by:
                                             
 (1) Donating property which may be of value to a charitable
organization to charity; or
                                             
 (2) Selling the property at public auction. The airport
director or designee shall fix a day upon which the auction shall take
place, and give notice thereof by publication in a daily newspaper. The
notice shall state the date, time, and place when such auction shall
commence and shall contain a general description of the types of
property to be sold. The notice shall be signed by an airport director
or designee. The proceeds of such auction shall be retained by the
airport for its use in aeronautical activities or donated to the state
aeronautical fund; or
                                             
 (3) Selling the property on an internet auction site with
sufficient buyer participation to ensure that the property receives
adequate exposure to the market for goods of the type being disposed of.
The proceeds of such auction shall be retained by the airport for its
use in aeronautical activities or donated to the state aeronautical
fund.
                                             
 (b) Property which fails to sell at public auction or on an
internet auction site may be disposed of in any manner which the airport
director or designee deems fit.
                                             
 III. The airport and the state, municipality, authority, or other
entity which owns or manages the airport shall have no liability for any
claim thereafter arising or made with respect to property disposed of
under this section.

**Source.** 2011, 224:376, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 471-C:14

 **471-C:14 Property Held in State Agency Storage Rooms. –**
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, all noncontraband
abandoned or lost property having a value of less than 
                                             $250 which has
been held in a state agency storage room for a period of at least 60
days may be disposed of by the state agency after the agency has made a
good faith effort to return the property to the owner, if known. If the
owner cannot be determined or the property cannot be returned for any
other reason, the property shall be transferred to the department of
administrative services, division of procurement and support services to
be sold at public auction with the proceeds to be turned over to the
state treasurer. The state shall be free of all liability for any claim
thereafter arising or made with respect to property disposed of under
this section.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987. 2014, 327:67, eff. Aug. 2,
2014.

### Section 471-C:15

 **471-C:15 Intangible Property Held by Courts and Public Agencies.
–** Intangible property held for the owner by a court, state or other
government, governmental subdivision or agency, public corporation, or
public authority which remains unclaimed by the owner for more than 3
years after becoming payable or distributable is presumed abandoned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:15-a

 **471-C:15-a Disposal of Unclaimed Property by the Courts. –**
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. A court which is holding lost, abandoned, or unclaimed property
subject to this chapter may dispose of it in accordance with procedures
established by the supreme court.

**Source.** 1988, 256:2. 1993, 190:15. 1995, 295:19, 20, eff. Aug. 20,
1995.

### Section 471-C:16

 **471-C:16 Gift Certificates and Store Credits. –** Notwithstanding
any law to the contrary, gift certificates of 
                                             $100 or less, and store
credits that were issued for store merchandise credit, regardless of
when issued, shall not be property presumed abandoned and shall not be
subject to RSA 471-C or any other past or present law. All gift
certificates and store credits remitted to the state prior to January 1,
1998, and gift certificates and store credits that are properly
determined to be reportable in any compliance audits initiated prior to
January 1, 1998 and subsequently remitted, shall remain in the custody
of the state unless and until returned to the owner. This section shall
not apply to season passes or coupons that are nonrefundable and
nonredeemable.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 295:8. 1997, 302:3. 2004, 228:2, eff.
Aug. 10, 2004.

### Section 471-C:17

 **471-C:17 Wages. –** Unpaid wages, including wages represented by
un-presented payroll checks, owing in the ordinary course of the
holder's business which remain unclaimed by the owner for more than one
year after becoming payable are presumed abandoned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:18

 **471-C:18 Contents of Safe Deposit Box or Other Safekeeping
Repository. –** All tangible and intangible property held in a safe
deposit box or any other safekeeping repository in this state in the
ordinary course of the holder's business and proceeds resulting from the
sale of the property permitted by other law, which remain unclaimed by
the owner for more than 5 years after the lease or rental period on the
box or other repository has expired, are presumed abandoned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 295:9, eff. Aug. 20, 1995.

### Section 471-C:19

 **471-C:19 Report of Abandoned Property. –**
                                             
 I. A person holding property, tangible or intangible, presumed
abandoned and subject to custody as unclaimed property under this
chapter shall report to the administrator concerning the property as
provided in this section. Reports containing 20 or more items shall be
remitted in an electronic format as prescribed by the administrator. The
administrator may waive this requirement when he or she determines that
it creates an undue hardship.
                                             
 II. The report shall be notarized and shall include:
                                             
 (a) Except with respect to travelers checks and money orders, the
name, if known, and last known address, if any, of each person appearing
from the records of the holder to be the owner of property of the value
of 
                                             $50 or more presumed abandoned under this chapter;
                                             
 (b) In the case of the unclaimed funds of 
                                             $50 or more held or
owing under any life or endowment insurance policy or annuity contract,
the full name and last known address of the insured or annuitant and of
the beneficiary according to the records of the insurance company
holding or owing the funds;
                                             
 (c) In the case of the contents of a safe deposit box or other
safekeeping repository or of other tangible property, a description of
the property and the place where it is held and may be inspected by the
administrator and any amounts owing to the holder;
                                             
 (d) The nature and identifying number, if any, or description of
the property and the amount appearing from the records to be due, but
items of value under 
                                             $50 each may be reported in the aggregate;
                                             
 (e) The date the property became payable, demandable, or
returnable, and the date of the last transaction with the apparent owner
with respect to the property; and
                                             
 (f) Other information the administrator prescribes by rules
adopted, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the administration of this
chapter.
                                             
 III. If the person holding property presumed abandoned and subject
to custody as unclaimed property is a successor to other persons who
previously held the property for the apparent owner, or the holder has
changed such holder's name while holding the property, the holder shall
file with the holder's report all known names and addresses of each
previous holder of the property.
                                             
 IV. The report shall be filed before November 1 of each year for
property presumed to be abandoned as of June 30 of that year, but the
report of any insurance company, including the report of unclaimed
demutualization proceeds under RSA 471-C:7-a, shall be filed before May
1 of each year for funds owing under insurance policies presumed to be
abandoned as of December 31 of the preceding year. On written request by
any person required to file a report, the administrator may postpone the
reporting date.
                                             
 V. Not more than 120 days before filing the report required by this
section, the holder in possession of property abandoned and subject to
custody as unclaimed property under this chapter, except for
demutualization proceeds under RSA 471-C:7-a, shall send written notice
to the apparent owner at such owner's last known address informing the
owner that the holder is in possession of property subject to this
chapter if:
                                             
 (a) The holder has in its records an address for the apparent
owner which the holder's records do not disclose to be inaccurate;
                                             
 (b) The claim of the apparent owner is not barred by the statute
of limitations; and
                                             
 (c) The property has a value of 
                                             $50 or more.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:2, 3. 1995, 84:6; 295:10-12. 2003,
218:6, eff. Aug. 30, 2003. 2008, 120:28, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 471-C:20

 **471-C:20 Notice and Publication of Lists of Abandoned Property.
–**
                                             
 I. The administrator shall publish a notice not later than November
30 of the year next following the year in which abandoned property has
been paid or delivered to the administrator or as required by RSA
471-C:19 at least once a week for 2 consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county of this state in which is located the
last known address of any person to be named in the notice. If no
address is listed or the address is outside this state, the notice must
be published in the county in which the holder of the property has its
principal place of business within this state.
                                             
 II. The published notice shall be entitled "Notice of Names of
Persons Appearing to be Owners of Abandoned Property'' and shall
contain:
                                             
 (a) The names in alphabetical order and last known address, if
any, of persons listed in the report and entitled to notice within the
county as specified in paragraph I.
                                             
 (b) A statement that information concerning the property and the
name and last known address of the holder may be obtained by any person
possessing an interest in the property by addressing an inquiry to the
administrator.
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. The administrator is not required to publish in the notice any
items of less than 
                                             $50 unless the administrator considers their
publication to be in the public interest.
                                             
 IV. Not later than November 30 of the year next following the year
in which abandoned property has been paid or delivered to the
administrator as required by RSA 471-C:19, the administrator shall mail
a notice to each person whose last known address is listed in the report
and who appears to be entitled to property of the value of 
                                             $50 or more
presumed abandoned under this chapter and any beneficiary of an
insurance policy or annuity contract for whom the administrator has a
last known address.
                                             
 V. The mailed notice must contain:
                                             
 (a) A statement that, according to a report filed with the
administrator, property is being held to which the addressee appears
entitled;
                                             
 (b) The name and last known address of the person holding the
property and any necessary information regarding the changes of name and
last known address of the holder; and
                                             
 (c) A statement that, if satisfactory proof of claim is not
presented by the owner to the holder by the date specified in the
published notice, the property will be placed in the custody of the
administrator and all further claims must be directed to the
administrator.
                                             
 VI. This section is not applicable to sums payable on travelers
checks, money orders, and other written instruments presumed abandoned
under RSA 471-C:4.
                                             
 VII. Any information or records required to be furnished to the
division of abandoned property shall be confidential except as is
otherwise necessary in the proper administration of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any identifying information
set forth in any report, record, claim, or other document submitted to
the treasurer pursuant to this chapter concerning unclaimed or abandoned
property is a confidential record and shall be made available for public
examination or copying only in the discretion of the treasurer or the
treasurer's designee.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:4-6, 16, II. 1995; 295:13, 14. 1999,
212:2, 3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2008, 120:29, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 471-C:21

 **471-C:21 Payment or Delivery of Abandoned Property. –**
                                             
 I. A person who is required to file a report under RSA 471-C:19
shall pay or deliver to the administrator all abandoned property
required to be reported at the time of filing the report except as
otherwise provided in RSA 471-C:8, II and IV.
                                             
 II, III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. The holder of an interest under RSA 471-C:10 shall deliver a
duplicate certificate or other evidence of ownership if the holder does
not issue certificates of ownership to the administrator. Upon delivery
of a duplicate certificate to the administrator, the holder and any
transfer agent, registrar, or other person acting for or on behalf of a
holder in executing or delivering the duplicate certificate is relieved
of all liability of every kind in accordance with the provisions of RSA
471-C:22 to every person, including any person acquiring the original
certificate or the duplicate of the certificate issued to the
administrator, for any losses or damages resulting to any person by the
issuance and delivery to the administrator of the duplicate certificate.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:7, 16, III. 1994, 213:2. 2004, 132:4,
eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 471-C:22

 **471-C:22 Custody by State; Holder Relieved From Liability;
Reimbursement of Holder Paying Claims; Reclaiming for Owner; Defense of
Holder; Payment of Safe Deposit Box or Repository Charges. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the payment or delivery of property to the administrator,
the state assumes custody and responsibility for the safekeeping of the
property. A person who pays or delivers property to the administrator in
good faith is relieved of all liability to the extent of the value of
the property paid or delivered for any claim then existing or which
thereafter may arise or be made in respect to the property.
                                             
 II. A holder who has paid money to the administrator pursuant to
this chapter may make payment to any person appearing to the holder to
be entitled to payment and, upon filing proof of payment and proof that
the payee was entitled thereto, the administrator shall promptly
reimburse the holder for the payment without imposing any fee or other
charge. If reimbursement is sought for a payment made on a negotiable
instrument, including a travelers check or money order, the holder shall
be reimbursed under this paragraph upon filing proof that the instrument
was duly presented and that payment was made to a person who appeared to
the holder to be entitled to payment. The holder shall be reimbursed for
payment made under this paragraph even if the payment was made to a
person whose claim was barred under RSA 471-C:33, I.
                                             
 III. A holder who has delivered property, including a certificate of
any interest in a business association, other than money to the
administrator pursuant to this chapter may reclaim the property if still
in the possession of the administrator, without paying any fee or other
charge, upon filing proof that the owner has claimed the property from
the holder.
                                             
 IV. The administrator may accept the holder's affidavit as
sufficient proof of the facts that entitle the holder to recover money
and property under this section.
                                             
 V. If the holder pays or delivers property to the administrator in
good faith and thereafter another person claims the property from the
holder or another state claims the money or property under its laws
relating to escheat or abandoned or unclaimed property, the
administrator, upon written notice of the claim, shall defend the holder
against the claim and indemnify the holder against any liability on the
claim.
                                             
 VI. For the purposes of this section, "good faith'' means that:
                                             
 (a) Payment or delivery was made in a reasonable attempt to
comply with this chapter;
                                             
 (b) The person delivering the property was not a fiduciary then
in breach of trust in respect to the property and had a reasonable basis
for believing, based on the facts then known to the person, that the
property was abandoned for the purposes of this chapter; and
                                             
 (c) There is no showing that the records pursuant to which the
delivery was made did not meet reasonable commercial standards of
practice in the industry.
                                             
 VII. Property removed from a safe deposit or other safekeeping
repository is received by the administrator subject to the holder's
right under this paragraph to be reimbursed for the actual cost of the
opening and to any valid lien or contract providing for the holder to be
reimbursed for unpaid rent or storage charges. The administrator shall
reimburse or pay the holder out of the proceeds remaining after
deducting the administrator's selling cost.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:7, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:23

 **471-C:23 Crediting of Dividends, Interest, or Increments to
Owner's Account. –** Whenever property other than money is paid or
delivered to the administrator under this chapter, the owner is entitled
to receive from the administrator any dividends, interest, or other
increments realized or accruing on the property at or before liquidation
or conversion thereof into money.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:24

 **471-C:24 Public Sale of Abandoned Property. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraphs II and III, the administrator,
within one year after the receipt of abandoned property, shall sell it
to the highest bidder at public sale in whatever city in the state
affords in the judgment of the administrator the most favorable market
for the property involved. The administrator may decline the highest bid
and reoffer the property for sale if in the judgment of the
administrator the bid is insufficient. If in the judgment of the
administrator the probable cost of sale exceeds the value of the
property it need not be offered for sale. Any sale held under this
section shall be preceded by notice sent via regular mail to the last
known address of the property owner at least 30 days in advance of sale
and a single publication of notice, at least 3 weeks in advance of sale,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
property is to be sold.
                                             
 II. Securities listed on an established stock exchange shall be sold
at prices prevailing at the time of sale on the exchange. Other
securities may be sold over the counter at prices prevailing at the time
of sale or by any other method the administrator considers advisable.
                                             
 III. Unless the administrator considers it to be in the best
interest of the state to do otherwise, all securities, other than those
presumed abandoned under RSA 471-C:10, delivered to the administrator
shall be held for at least one year before the administrator may sell
them. Sales of securities shall be preceded by regular mail notice as
set forth in paragraph I.
                                             
 IV. Unless the administrator considers it to be in the best interest
of the state to do otherwise, all securities presumed abandoned under
RSA 471-C:10 and delivered to the administrator shall be held for at
least one year before the administrator may sell them. If the
administrator sells any securities delivered pursuant to RSA 471-C:10
before the expiration of the one-year period, any person making a claim
pursuant to this chapter before the end of the one-year period is
entitled to either the proceeds of the sale of the securities or the
market value of the securities at the time the claim is made, whichever
amount is greater, less any deduction for fees pursuant to RSA 471-C:25,
II. A person making a claim under this chapter after the expiration of
this period is entitled to receive either the securities delivered to
the administrator by the holder, if they still remain in the hands of
the administrator, or the proceeds received from sale, less any amount
deducted pursuant to RSA 471-C:25, II, but no person has any claim under
this chapter against the state, the holder, any transfer agent,
registrar, or other person acting for or on behalf of a holder for any
appreciation in the value of the property occurring after delivery by
the holder to the administrator.
                                             
 V. The purchaser of property at any sale conducted by the
administrator pursuant to this chapter takes the property free of all
claims of the owner or previous holder thereof and of all persons
claiming through or under them. The administrator shall execute all
documents necessary to complete the transfer of ownership.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:8, 9. 1995, 84:8, eff. July 15, 1995.
2008, 120:30, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 471-C:25

 **471-C:25 Deposit of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided by this section, the administrator
shall promptly deposit in the general fund of this state all funds
received under this chapter, including the proceeds from the sale of
abandoned property under RSA 471-C:24; provided, however, that in the
case of funds which originated from the highway fund or fish and game
fund, any such funds received under this chapter shall be deposited in
the fund from which they originated. The administrator shall retain in a
separate fund an amount sufficient to make prompt payment of claims duly
allowed. Before making the deposit, the administrator shall record the
name and last known address of each person appearing from the holders'
reports to be entitled to the property and the name and last known
address of each insured person or annuitant and beneficiary and, with
respect to each policy or contract listed in the report of an insurance
company, its number and the name of the company. The record must be
available for public inspection at all reasonable business hours.
                                             
 II. Before making any deposit to the credit of the general fund or
county treasurer as provided in paragraph I, the administrator may
deduct any costs incurred in connection with the administration of this
chapter; provided, however, that costs incurred in the effectuation of
RSA 471-C:30 shall be allowed as set forth in RSA 471-C:30, II.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1989, 408:72. 1990, 105:10. 1999, 212:4, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 471-C:26

 **471-C:26 Filing of Claim With Administrator. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A person, excluding another state, claiming an interest in
any property paid or delivered to the administrator may file with the
administrator a claim on a form prescribed by the administrator and
verified by the claimant.
                                             
 (b) A person claiming an abandoned utility deposit or any other
abandoned property under the provisions of RSA 471-C:8 that was not
deposited with the administrator pursuant to RSA 471-C:8, II or IV, may
file a claim on a form prescribed by the administrator and verified by
the claimant. Any claim paid by the administrator under this paragraph,
shall be reimbursable by the utility company which originally reported
the property as abandoned or the public interest payphone fund
established under RSA 374:22-q. The utility company or the public
interest payphone fund shall remit such payment upon notification of the
claim by the administrator.
                                             
 (c) If the administrator holds unclaimed property in the name of
a deceased owner, the administrator may consider claims to the property
as follows:
                                             
 (1) In the case of an open estate, by the administrator or
executor appointed by the probate court.
                                             
 (2) Except as provided in subparagraphs (5)-(7), in the case
of a closed estate where the unclaimed property is valued at less than

                                             $5,000 and does not include securities in share form, in accordance
with the final distribution of assets as approved by the probate court.
                                             
 (3) Except as provided in subparagraphs (5)-(7), in the
absence of an open estate or probate court decree of final distribution,
and the unclaimed property is valued at less than 
                                             $5,000 and does not
include securities in share form, by the surviving spouse of the
deceased owner, or, if there is no surviving spouse, then to the next of
kin in accordance with the provisions of RSA 561:1.
                                             
 (4) In all other instances where the administrator holds
property in the name of a deceased owner, a probate estate shall be
opened, in an appropriate jurisdiction by the claimant, or other
interested party, in order to determine the appropriate distribution of
the unclaimed property under the law.
                                             
 (5) Before distributing any unclaimed property pursuant to
subparagraphs (2) and (3), the administrator shall first ensure that the
department of health and human services does not have a claim for
medical and or financial assistance paid on behalf of the deceased
owner.
                                             
 (6) In the event that the department of health and human
services has a claim for medical and or financial assistance paid on
behalf of the deceased owner, the department may submit a claim for such
assistance using an affidavit developed by the administrator that
ensures that:
                                             
 (A) No individual has moved to probate the deceased owner's
estate through which the department could assert its claim or probate
administration for the deceased owner had been open and no individual
has moved to reopen the estate through which the department could assert
its claim;
                                             
 (B) The department does not believe, based on the
information available to it, there are known expenses for the deceased
owner's necessary funeral and burial; and
                                             
 (C) Based on all facts known to the department, its
recovery of this abandoned property is not limited by the prohibitions
to recovery as set forth in 42 U.S.C. section 1396p and RSA 167:16-a,
IV.
                                             
 (7) If the department of health and human services has made a
claim against a deceased owner's unclaimed property as provided in
subparagraph (6), under no circumstances shall the administrator
distribute to the department more than the claimed amount.
                                             
 II. The administrator shall consider each claim within 90 days after
it is filed and give written notice to the claimant if the claim is
denied in whole or in part. The notice may be given by mailing it to the
last address, if any, stated in the claim as the address to which
notices are to be sent. If no address for notices is stated in the
claim, the notice may be mailed to the last address, if any, of the
claimant as stated in the claim. No notice of denial need be given if
the claim fails to state either the last address to which notices are to
be sent or the address of the claimant.
                                             
 III. If a claim is allowed, the administrator shall pay over or
deliver to the claimant the property or the amount the administrator
actually received or the net proceeds if it has been sold by the
administrator, together with any additional amount required by RSA
471-C:23.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:11, 16, IV. 1994, 213:3. 1995, 84:9.
2004, 132:5, eff. July 1, 2005. 2008, 120:31, eff. Aug. 2, 2008. 2010,
Sp. Sess., 1:3, 4, eff. June 10, 2010.

### Section 471-C:27

 **471-C:27 Claim of Another State to Recover Property; Procedure.
–**
                                             
 I. At any time after property has been paid or delivered to the
administrator under this chapter, another state may recover the property
if:
                                             
 (a) The property was subjected to custody by this state because
the records of the holder did not reflect the last known address of the
apparent owner when the property was presumed abandoned under this
chapter, and the other state establishes that the last known address of
the apparent owner or other person entitled to the property was in that
state and under the laws of that state the property escheated to or was
subject to a claim of abandonment by that state;
                                             
 (b) The last known address of the apparent owner or other person
entitled to the property, as reflected by the records of the holder, is
in the other state and under the laws of the state the property has
escheated to or become subject to a claim of abandonment by that state;
                                             
 (c) The records of the holder were erroneous in that they did not
accurately reflect the actual owner of the property and the last known
address of the actual owner is in the other state and under the laws of
that state the property escheated to or was subject to a claim of
abandonment by that state;
                                             
 (d) The property was subjected to custody by this state under RSA
471-C:3, VI and under the laws of the state of domicile of the holder
the property has escheated to or become subject to a claim of
abandonment by that state; or
                                             
 (e) The property is the sum payable on a travelers check, money
order, or other similar instrument that was subjected to custody by this
state under RSA 471-C:4, and that instrument was purchased in the other
state, and under the laws of that state the property escheated to or
became subject to a claim of abandonment by that state.
                                             
 II. The claim of another state to recover escheated or abandoned
property must be presented in a form prescribed by the administrator,
who shall decide the claim within 90 days after it is presented. The
administrator shall allow the claim if the administrator determines that
the other state is entitled to the abandoned property under paragraph
I.
                                             
 III. The administrator shall require a state, before recovering
property under this section, to agree to indemnify this state and its
officers and employees against any liability on a claim for the
property.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:10, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:28

 **471-C:28 Action to Establish Claim. –** A person aggrieved by a
decision of the administrator or whose claim has not been acted upon
within 90 days after its filing may bring an action to establish the
claim in the Merrimack county superior court, naming the administrator
as a defendant. The action must be brought within 90 days after the
decision of the administrator or within 180 days after the filing of the
claim if the administrator has failed to act on it.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:11, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:29

 **471-C:29 Election to Take Payment or Delivery. –**
                                             
 I. The administrator may decline to receive any property reported
under this chapter which the administrator considers to have a value
less than the expense of giving notice and of sale. If the administrator
elects not to receive custody of the property, the holder shall be
notified within 120 days after filing the report required under RSA
471-C:19.
                                             
 II. A holder, with the written consent of the administrator and upon
conditions and terms prescribed by the administrator, may report and
deliver property before the property is presumed abandoned. Property
delivered under this paragraph must be held by the administrator and is
not presumed abandoned until such time as it otherwise would be presumed
abandoned under this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 84:12, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:30

 **471-C:30 Escheat Proceedings. –**
                                             
 I. Within 36 months after the close of the state's fiscal year in
which any property presumed abandoned under this chapter is paid or
delivered to the administrator, if no claim for the property has been
made and established by any person, not including another state,
entitled to the property and notice pursuant to RSA 471-C:20 has
occurred, the administrator shall pay or deliver all such property to
the appropriate county treasurer as required under RSA 471-C:31, subject
to the state deduction under paragraph II.
                                             
 II. Before the administrator pays or delivers the property to the
general fund or the appropriate county treasurer as required under
paragraph I and RSA 471-C:31, the administrator shall retain 15 percent
of the amount to be returned as a deduction for any costs and service
charges which the state shall incur in escheat proceedings or with
respect to reimbursements made pursuant to paragraph III. The
administrator shall deposit this sum in the general fund.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any holder of a
travelers check, bearer bond, or money order who has paid money to the
administrator pursuant to this chapter and who subsequently makes
payment to any other person appearing to the holder to be entitled to
payment. Upon filing proof of payment that the payee was entitled
thereto, the administrator shall promptly reimburse such holder for such
payment without imposing any fee or other charge.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1988, 256:3. 1990, 105:12. 1995, 84:13, 14;
295:15, 16. 1997, 208:15, 16. 1999, 212:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2008,
120:32, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 471-C:31

 **471-C:31 Final Disposition. –**
                                             
 I. As used in this section, "appropriate county treasurer'' means
the treasurer of the county where the holder was located at the time the
property under this chapter was delivered to the administrator under RSA
471-C:21.
                                             
 II. Following completion of the proceedings specified in RSA
471-C:30, the administrator shall pay or deliver all property escheated
under this chapter to the appropriate county treasurer who shall deposit
such property in the county treasury; provided, however, that the
administrator shall not pay or deliver the income earned from the
working capital fund or any amounts received from out-of-state holders
to the counties. The administrator shall reduce amounts paid to the
counties under this section for subsequent claims asserted under RSA
471-C:31-a, if such amounts have previously escheated to the counties.
                                             
 III. Property delivered from out-of-state holders shall escheat to
the general fund.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1989, 408:73. 1995, 84:1. 1999, 212:6, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 471-C:31-a

 **471-C:31-a Subsequent Claims. –** For periods after January 1,
1985, any owner who comes forward to make a claim for assets which have
escheated to the state may petition the governor and council for payment
of those assets. Upon providing sufficient proof of the validity of such
owner claim and receiving the approval of governor and council, the
administrator shall pay such claim to the owner in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1993, 310:1. 1995, 84:15, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 471-C:32

 **471-C:32 Destruction or Disposition of Property Having
Insubstantial Commercial Value; Immunity From Liability. –** If the
administrator determines after investigation that any property delivered
under this chapter has insubstantial commercial value, the administrator
may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property at any time. No action
or proceeding may be maintained against the state or any officer or
against the holder for or on account of any action taken by the
administrator pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:33

 **471-C:33 Periods of Limitation. –**
                                             
 I. The expiration, before or after January 1, 1987, of any period of
time specified by contract, statute, or court order, during which a
claim for money or property can be made or during which an action or
proceeding may be enforced to obtain payment of a claim for money or to
recover property, does not prevent the money or property from being
presumed abandoned or affect any duty to file a report or to pay or
deliver abandoned property to the administrator as required by this
chapter.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the expiration of
any period of time specified by law, during which an action or
proceeding may be commenced or enforced to obtain payment of a claim for
money or recovery of property, shall not serve as a defense in any
action or proceeding brought by or on behalf of the administrator
against any federal, state or local government or governmental
subdivision, agency, entity, officer or appointee for the payment or
delivery of any abandoned property to the administrator pursuant to this
chapter or to enforce or collect any penalty provided by this chapter.
                                             
 III. Paragraph II shall apply to all abandoned property held by any
federal, state or local government or governmental subdivision, agency,
entity, officer or appointee on or after April 13, 1990, regardless of
when such property shall be deemed presumptively abandoned.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:14, eff. April 13, 1990.

### Section 471-C:34

 **471-C:34 Requests for Reports and Examination of Records. –**
                                             
 I. The administrator may require any person who has not filed a
report to file a verified report stating whether or not the person is
holding any unclaimed property reportable or deliverable under this
chapter.
                                             
 II. The administrator, at reasonable times and upon reasonable
notice, may examine the records of any person to determine whether the
person has complied with the provisions of this chapter. The
administrator may conduct the examination even if the person believes it
is not in possession of any property reportable or deliverable under
this chapter.
                                             
 III. If a person is treated under RSA 471-C:12 as the holder of the
property only insofar as the interest of the business association in the
property is concerned, the administrator, pursuant to paragraph II, may
examine the records of the person if the administrator has given the
notice required by paragraph II to both the person and the business
association at least 90 days before the examination.
                                             
 IV. If an examination of the records of a person results in the
disclosure of property reportable and deliverable under this chapter,
the administrator may assess the cost of the examination against the
holder at the current rate established in RSA 383:11 for each examiner,
but in no case may the charges exceed the value of the property found to
be reportable and deliverable. The cost of examination made pursuant to
paragraph III may be imposed only against the business association.
                                             
 V. If a holder fails after January 1, 1987 to maintain the records
required by RSA 471-C:35 and the records of the holder available for the
periods subject to this chapter are insufficient to permit the
preparation of a report, the administrator may require the holder to
report and pay such amounts as may reasonably be estimated from any
available records.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:35

 **471-C:35 Retention of Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every holder required to file a report under RSA 471-C:19, as to
any property for which it has obtained the last known address of the
owner, shall maintain a record of the name and last known address of the
owner for 10 years after the property becomes reportable, except to the
extent that a shorter time is provided in paragraph II or by rule of the
administrator.
                                             
 II. Any business association that sells in this state its travelers
checks, money orders, or other similar written instruments, other than
third-party bank checks on which the business association is directly
liable, or that provides such instruments to others for sale in this
state, shall maintain a record of those instruments while they remain
out-standing, indicating the state and date of issue for 3 years after
the date the property is reportable.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:36

 **471-C:36 Enforcement. –** The administrator may bring an action on
behalf of the state in the superior court for Merrimack county or in any
federal court with jurisdiction to enforce this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1990, 105:15, eff. April 13, 1990.

### Section 471-C:37

 **471-C:37 Interstate Agreements and Cooperation; Joint and
Reciprocal Actions With Other States. –**
                                             
 I. The administrator may enter into agreements with other states to
exchange information needed to enable this or another state to audit or
otherwise determine unclaimed property that it or another state may be
entitled to subject to a claim of custody. The administrator, by rules
adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, may require the reporting of information
needed to enable compliance with agreements made pursuant to this
section and may prescribe the form.
                                             
 II. To avoid conflicts between the administrator's procedures and
the procedures of administrators in other jurisdictions that enact the
Uniform Unclaimed Property Act, the administrator, so far as is
consistent with the purposes, policies, and provisions of this chapter,
before adopting, amending, or repealing rules, shall advise and consult
with administrators in other jurisdictions that enact substantially the
Uniform Unclaimed Property Act and take into consideration the rules of
administrators in other jurisdictions that enact the Uniform Unclaimed
Property Act.
                                             
 III. The administrator may join with other states to seek
enforcement of this chapter against any person who is or may be holding
property reportable under this chapter.
                                             
 IV. At the request of another state, the attorney general of this
state may bring an action in the name of the administrator of the other
state in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the unclaimed
property laws of the other state against a holder in this state of
property subject to escheat or a claim of abandonment by the other
state, if the other state has agreed to pay expenses incurred by the
attorney general in bringing the action.
                                             
 V. The administrator may request that the attorney general of
another state or any other person bring an action in the name of the
administrator in the other state. This state shall pay all expenses
including attorney's fees in any action under this paragraph. The
administrator may agree to pay the person bringing the action attorney's
fees based in whole or in part on a percentage of the value of any
property recovered in the action. Any expenses paid pursuant to this
paragraph may not be deducted from the amount that is subject to the
claim by the owner under this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:38

 **471-C:38 Interest and Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. A person who fails to pay or deliver property within the time
prescribed by this chapter may be assessed interest by the administrator
at the annual rate of 18 percent on the property or value thereof from
the date the property should have been paid or delivered, or 
                                             $25,
whichever is greater.
                                             
 II. A person who willfully fails to render any report or perform
other duties required under this chapter may be assessed a civil penalty
of 
                                             $100 for each day the report is withheld or the duty is not
performed, but not more than 
                                             $5,000.
                                             
 III. A person who willfully fails to pay or deliver property to the
administrator as required under this chapter shall pay a civil penalty
equal to 25 percent of the value of the property that should have been
paid or delivered.
                                             
 IV. A person who willfully refuses after written demand by the
administrator to pay or deliver property to the administrator as
required under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 295:2. 1999, 212:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 471-C:39

 **471-C:39 Agreement to Locate, Deliver, or Recover Reported
Property. –**
                                             
 I. All agreements to pay compensation to locate, deliver, recover,
or assist in the recovery of property reported under RSA 471-C:19, made
within 24 months after the date payment or delivery is made under RSA
471-C:21, are unenforceable.
                                             
 II. An agreement to pay compensation to recover or assist in the
recovery of unclaimed property shall be valid only if the agreement is
in writing and signed by the apparent owner, sets forth the nature and
value of the property and the value of the apparent owner's share after
the fee or compensation has been deducted, and contains the following
disclosure: "Each state maintains an office of abandoned property.
Generally, if for a number of years an owner of property has not
communicated in writing directly with the holder of the property and has
not otherwise indicated an interest in the property, the property may be
transferred to the office of abandoned property which will act as
custodian of the property for the owner.''
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an owner
from asserting at any time that an agreement to locate property is based
upon an excessive or unjust consideration.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1. 1995, 230:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 471-C:40

 **471-C:40 Foreign Transactions. –** This chapter does not apply to
any property held, due and owing in a foreign country, and arising out
of foreign transactions.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:41

 **471-C:41 Effect of New Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter does not relieve a holder of a duty that arose
before January 1, 1987, to report, pay, or deliver property. A holder
who did not comply with the law in effect before January 1, 1987, shall
be subject to the applicable enforcement and penalty provisions that
then existed and they are continued in effect for the purpose of this
paragraph, subject to RSA 471-C:33, II.
                                             
 II. The initial report filed under this chapter for property that
was not required to be reported before January 1, 1987, shall include
all items of property that would have been presumed abandoned during the
10-year period preceding January 1, 1987, as if this chapter had been in
effect during that period.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:42

 **471-C:42 Rulemaking. –** The administrator may adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:43

 **471-C:43 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1986, 204:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 471-C:44

 **471-C:44 Unclaimed United States Savings Bonds. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, "United States savings bond'' means property,
tangible or intangible, in the form of a savings bond issued by the
United States treasury whether in paper form, electronic, or paperless
form, along with all proceeds thereof.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, United States
savings bonds held or owing in this state by any person, or issued or
owed in the course of a holder's business, or by a state or other
government, governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, and
all proceeds thereof, shall be presumed abandoned and unclaimed in this
state if:
                                             
 (a) The last known address of the owner of the United States
savings bond is in New Hampshire; and
                                             
 (b) The United States savings bond has remained unclaimed and
unredeemed for 5 years after final maturity.
                                             
 III. United States savings bonds which are presumed abandoned and
unclaimed under paragraph II, including bonds in the possession of the
administrator, and those lost, stolen, or destroyed bonds registered to
persons with last known addresses in the state, shall escheat to the
state of New Hampshire one year after such bonds are presumed abandoned,
and all property rights and legal title to and ownership of the United
States savings bonds or proceeds from the bonds, including all rights,
powers, and privileges of survivorship of any owner, co-owner, or
beneficiary, shall vest solely in the state of New Hampshire according
to the procedure set forth in paragraphs IV and IX.
                                             
 IV. Within 180 days after the one year prescribed in paragraph III,
if no claim has been filed with the administrator for such United States
savings bonds, the administrator may commence a civil action in the
Merrimack County superior court, or in any other court of competent
jurisdiction, for a determination that such United States savings bonds
shall escheat to the state of New Hampshire. The administrator may
postpone the bringing of such action until sufficient United States
savings bonds have accumulated in the administrator's custody to justify
the expense of such proceedings.
                                             
 V. The administrator shall make service by publication of the civil
action in accordance with RSA 471-C:20.
                                             
 VI. Before service by publication as required by paragraph V of this
section can be made, the administrator shall file with the court an
affidavit or a declaration stating all of the following facts that
apply:
                                             
 (a) The residences of all named persons sought to be served, if
known, and the names of all persons whose residences are unknown after
reasonable effort to ascertain them and the specific efforts made to
ascertain their residences.
                                             
 (b) The affiant or declarant has made a reasonable but
unsuccessful effort to ascertain the names and residences of any person
or persons sought to be served as unknown parties and the specific
efforts made to ascertain the names and residences.
                                             
 (c) The affiant or declarant seeking service by publication is
unable to obtain service of summons on the person or persons in this
state.
                                             
 (d) The affiant or declarant seeking service by publication sent
notice by certified mail to the last known address in New Hampshire of
the person or persons of their ability to make a claim.
                                             
 VII. If no person files a claim with the administrator or appears at
the court hearing to substantiate a claim or where the court determines
that a claimant is not entitled to the property claimed by such
claimant, then the court, if satisfied by evidence that the
administrator has substantially complied with the laws of the state of
New Hampshire, shall enter a judgment that the subject United States
savings bonds, registered to persons with last known addresses in the
state, have escheated to the state of New Hampshire, and all property
rights and legal title to and ownership of such United States savings
bonds or proceeds from such bonds, including all rights, powers, and
privileges of survivorship of any owner, co-owner or beneficiary, shall
vest in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 VIII. The administrator shall redeem such United States savings
bonds escheated to the state of New Hampshire and when the proceeds
which have escheated have been recovered by the administrator, it shall
first pay all costs incident to the collection and recovery of such
proceeds from the redemption of the United States savings bonds and
shall thereafter promptly deposit the remaining balance of such proceeds
to the state general fund, to be distributed in accordance with law.
                                             
 IX. Any person making a claim for the United States savings bonds
which have escheated to the state of New Hampshire under this section,
or for the proceeds from such bonds which have escheated to the state of
New Hampshire, may file a claim with the administrator. Upon providing
sufficient proof of the validity of such person's claim, the
administrator may pay such claim less any expenses and costs, not to
exceed 10 percent of the bond's proceeds, which shall have been incurred
by the state in securing full title and ownership of such property by
escheat. If payment has been made to any claimant, no action thereafter
shall be maintained by any other claimant against the state or any
officer thereof, for or on account of such funds.

**Source.** 2015, 152:1, eff. Aug. 11, 2015.
