---
title: 'CHAPTER 471-D DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY BY REPAIR BUSINESSES'
---

TITLE XLVI
                                             
LOST PROPERTY; STRAYS
=====================

CHAPTER 471-D
                                             
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY BY REPAIR BUSINESSES
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 471-D:1

 **471-D:1 Definition. –** In this chapter "owner'' means a person
having a legal or equitable interest in property subject to this chapter
or his legal representative.

**Source.** 1988, 256:4, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 471-D:2

 **471-D:2 Disposal by Repair Businesses of Certain Unclaimed
Property. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding RSA 471-C, a person who repairs, alters, treats,
or improves personal property in the ordinary course of his business
pursuant to an express or implied contract with an owner of the personal
property may, upon compliance with the notice requirement under
paragraph II, dispose of any personal property of a value of 
                                             $500 or
less, other than a motor vehicle, that has not been claimed by the owner
for a period of 60 days or more after his receipt of written notice that
the property is ready to be claimed.
                                             
 II. The repair business shall, at the time the property is
surrendered, have a written notice of dimensions of not less than 8 1/2
by 11 inches prominently displayed in a conspicuous place in the office
or shop where the property was surrendered containing the following
message: "Not responsible for goods left on hand for more than 60
days''. When the property has been repaired or otherwise processed, the
repair business shall notify the owner of the property, by certified
mail with return receipt requested, that the property is ready to be
claimed.

**Source.** 1988, 256:4, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 471-D:3

 **471-D:3 Exemption From Liability. –** Any person who disposes of
property in accordance with this chapter shall not be liable for damages
to the owner of such disposed property.

**Source.** 1988, 256:4, eff. June 29, 1988.
