---
title: 'CHAPTER 455-A JUSTICES OF THE PEACE'
---

TITLE XLII
                                             
NOTARIES, COMMISSIONERS, JUSTICES OF THE PEACE, AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
===================================================================

CHAPTER 455-A
                                             
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
---------------------

### Section 455-A:1

 **455-A:1 Appointment. –** Justices of the peace shall be appointed
by the governor, with the advice and consent of the executive council,
and shall be commissioned for 5 years, as provided in the New Hampshire
constitution.

**Source.** 1988, 121:10, eff. Oct. 1, 1988.

### Section 455-A:2

 **455-A:2 Application. –**
                                             
 I. Any person applying to be a justice of the peace shall indicate
on the application whether he or she has been a registered voter in this
state for at least 3 years immediately preceding the date of
application. The applicant must sign a written statement under oath
stating whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime that
has not been annulled by a court, other than minor traffic violations.
The applicant shall be endorsed for appointment by 2 justices of the
peace and a registered voter of this state.
                                             
 II. A person shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed

                                             $1,000 if he or she negligently or recklessly makes a material false
representation on the application form when applying for a commission as
a justice of the peace. A person is guilty of a class A misdemeanor if
he or she purposefully or knowingly makes a material false
representation on the application form when applying for a commission as
a justice of the peace. The civil penalty shall be imposed in the same
manner as set forth in RSA 455:16.

**Source.** 1988, 121:10. 1997, 102:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998. 2005, 118:12,
eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 455-A:3

 **455-A:3 Powers. –** Every justice of the peace shall have the
power to administer oaths, perform marriage ceremonies, acknowledge
instruments, and any other power prescribed by law. A justice of the
peace signing an acknowledgment or jurat on any document or instrument
shall type, print, or stamp the name of the justice of the peace and
state the expiration date of his or her commission on the document or
instrument. However, failure to meet these requirements shall not impair
the legal validity of any acknowledgment or jurat.

**Source.** 1988, 121:10. 1999, 153:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
