---
title: CHAPTER 455 NOTARIES PUBLIC AND COMMISSIONERS
---

TITLE XLII
                                             
NOTARIES, COMMISSIONERS, JUSTICES OF THE PEACE, AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
===================================================================

CHAPTER 455
                                             
NOTARIES PUBLIC AND COMMISSIONERS
---------------------------------

Notaries Public
---------------

### Section 455:1

 **455:1 Appointment. –** Notaries public shall be appointed by the
governor, with advice and consent of the executive council, and shall be
commissioned for 5 years.

**Source.** GS 16:1. GL 17:1. PS 18:1. PL 17:1. RL 25:1. RSA 455:1.
1988, 121:2, eff. Oct. 1, 1988.

### Section 455:2

 **455:2 Application. –** Any person applying to be a notary public
shall be a resident of this state. The applicant shall sign a written
statement under oath as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted
of a crime that has not been annulled by a court, other than minor
traffic violations. The applicant shall be endorsed for appointment by 2
notaries public and a registered voter of this state.

**Source.** 1917, 71:1. PL 17:2. RL 25:2. RSA 455:2. 1988, 121:3. 1991,
254:7. 1997, 102:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 455:2-a

 **455:2-a Competency. –** It shall be lawful for any notary public
or any other officer authorized to administer an oath or take an
acknowledgment or proof of an instrument or make protest, who is a
stockholder, director, officer or employee of a bank or other
corporation, to take the acknowledgment of any party to any written
instrument executed to or by such corporation, or to administer an oath
to any other stockholder, director, officer, employee or agent of such
corporation, or to protest for nonacceptance or nonpayment bills of
exchange, drafts, checks, notes and other negotiable instruments which
may be owned or held for collection by such corporation; provided it
shall be unlawful for any notary public or other officer authorized to
administer an oath or take an acknowledgment or proof of an instrument
or make protest, to take the acknowledgment of an instrument executed by
or to a bank or other corporation of which he is a stockholder,
director, officer or employee, where such notary or other officer is a
party to such instrument, either individually or as a representative of
such corporation, or to protest any negotiable instrument owned or held
for collection by such corporation, where such notary or other officer
is individually a party to such instrument. No person acting in the
capacity of notary public shall notarize his or her own signature. This
section shall not be construed to imply that the acts herein made lawful
may heretofore have been unlawful, and no instrument heretofore
acknowledged or notarized before a notary public or other officer who
would have been competent to act under the terms hereof shall hereafter
be impugned or invalidated on the grounds that such notary public or
other officer was incompetent to act.

**Source.** 1959, 68:1. 1988, 121:4, eff. Oct. 1, 1988.

### Section 455:3

 **455:3 Powers. –** Every notary public, in addition to the usual
powers of the office, shall have the same powers as a justice of the
peace in relation to depositions and the acknowledgment of deeds and
other instruments and the administering of oaths. All acknowledgments
made by a notary public shall be either under an official seal or shall
carry the legible imprint of an official rubber stamp stating the name
of the notary, the words "notary public, New Hampshire'' and the
expiration date of the notary public's commission.

**Source.** RS 14:1. CS 14:1. GS 16:2. GL 17:2. PS 18:2. 1893, 26:1. PL
17:3. RL 25:3. RSA 455:3. 1988, 121:5. 1995, 74:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 455:4

 **455:4 Protest as Evidence. –** The protest of a bill of exchange,
note, or order, duly certified by a notary public, shall be evidence of
the facts stated in the protest and of the notice given to the drawer or
endorsers.

**Source.** RS 14:3. CS 14:3. GS 16:3. GL 17:3. PS 18:3. PL 17:4. RL
25:4. RSA 455:4. 1995, 74:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2005, 118:1, eff. Jan.
1, 2006.

### Section 455:5-10

 **455:5 to 455:10 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2005, 118:13, I, eff.
Jan. 1, 2006.
                                             ]

Notarial Fees
-------------

### Section 455:11

 **455:11 Notarial Fees. –** Notaries public shall be entitled to a
fee of up to 
                                             $10 for each oath, witness, service, or certification with
the following exceptions:
                                             
 I. For services related to the taking of depositions, the notary
public shall be entitled to the same fees as justices are entitled to
receive pursuant to RSA 517:19.
                                             
 II. No fees shall be allowed for administering and certifying oaths
of office of town officers.

**Source.** RS 229:24. CS 245:24. GS 272:25. GL 290:25. PS 287:30. PL
17:11. RL 25:11. RSA 455:11. 1971, 373:1. 1990, 16:3, eff. May 12, 1990.
2005, 118:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

Commissioners
-------------

### Section 455:12

 **455:12 Appointment. –** The governor, with advice and consent of
the executive council, may appoint, in each state, district, and
territory of the United States, and in each foreign country to which the
United States sends a representative, a commissioner or commissioners of
deeds, to continue in office 5 years.

**Source.** RS 14:9. CS 14:9. GS 16:10. GL 17:10. 1879, 57:2. PS 18:10.
PL 17:12. RL 25:12. RSA 455:12. 1988, 121:8, eff. Oct. 1, 1988. 2005,
118:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 455:13

 **455:13 Oath. –** Before any commissioner of deeds shall perform
any duty of his or her office, he or she shall take and subscribe an
oath, before a judge of some court of record, that he or she will well
and faithfully perform all the duties of the office, which oath shall be
filed by him or her in the office of the secretary of state within 3
months after taking the same.

**Source.** RS 14:10. CS 14:10. GS 16:11. GL 17:11. PS 18:11. PL 17:13.
RL 25:13. RSA 455:13. 1988, 121:9, eff. Oct. 1, 1988. 2005, 118:4, eff.
Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 455:14

 **455:14 Powers. –** Such commissioner of deeds may, both within and
without this state, administer oaths, take depositions and affidavits to
be used in this state and notify parties of the time and place thereof,
and take the acknowledgment of deeds or instruments to be used or
recorded in this state, in the same manner and with the same effect as a
justice of the peace of this state may do within the state.

**Source.** RS 14:11, 12. CS 14:11, 12. GS 16:12, 13. GL 17:12, 13. PS
18:12. PL 17:14. RL 25:14. RSA 455:14. 1986, 87:2, eff. July 18, 1986.
2005, 118:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 455:15

 **455:15 For Other States; By Court Appointment. –** Any
commissioner for any other state who is authorized to take depositions,
administer oaths and affirmations and take the acknowledgment of deeds
within this state, to be used in such other state, and any commissioner
appointed by the supreme or superior court or any justice thereof, shall
have the power to administer oaths and affirmations, to issue writs of
summons to a witness, to proceed against such witness upon his neglect
to appear and give his deposition, and in all proceedings under his
commission, that is vested in justices of the peace in like cases.

**Source.** 1860, 2372:1. GS 16:14. GL 17:14. PS 18:13. PL 17:15. RL
25:15.

Enforcement
-----------

### Section 455:16

 **455:16 Misconduct, Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. A person shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed

                                             $1,000 if such person:
                                             
 (a) When applying for a commission as a notary public,
negligently or recklessly makes a material false representation on the
application form;
                                             
 (b) Holding a commission as a notary public or justice of the
peace, negligently or recklessly makes a notarial act that is false;
                                             
 (c) Holding a commission as a notary public or justice of the
peace, negligently or recklessly makes a notarial act for a person not
personally known by the notary without first requiring the person to
establish his or her identity; or
                                             
 (d) Holding a commission as a notary public or justice of the
peace, negligently or recklessly makes a notarial act purporting to have
witnessed the maker's signing of the document or purporting to have
received the oath or affirmation of the person, when the notary did not
actually witness the maker's signing of the document or did not actually
receive the oath or affirmation of the person.
                                             
 II. A person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor:
                                             
 (a) If such person purposefully or knowingly commits any of the
acts listed in paragraph I.
                                             
 (b) If such person makes a notarial act, as defined by RSA
456-B:1, I, knowing he or she is not a person authorized by RSA 456-B:3
to perform a notarial act.
                                             
 III. (a) The court, upon petition of the attorney general, may levy
upon any person who violates the provisions of paragraph I a civil
penalty in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 per violation. All penalties
assessed under this paragraph shall be paid to the secretary of state
for deposit into the general fund.
                                             
 (b) The attorney general shall have authority to notify suspected
violators of this section of the state's intention to seek a civil
penalty, to negotiate, and to settle with such suspected violators
without court action, provided any civil penalty paid as settlement
shall be paid to the secretary of state for deposit into the general
fund.

**Source.** 2005, 118:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 455:17

 **455:17 Notary Public, Justice of the Peace Manual, Education,
Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. The secretary of state, with the advice and approval of the
attorney general, shall prepare or cause to be prepared an up-to-date
manual on the privileges, duties, and responsibilities of notaries
public and justices of the peace in New Hampshire. The manual shall be
written in non-technical language. The manual shall be distributed to
each person commissioned a notary public, commissioner of deeds pursuant
to RSA 455:12, and justice of the peace. The manual shall be available
to the public free of charge. The manual shall be updated within 6
months following the end of any session of the legislature that amends
the statutes affecting the privileges, duties, or responsibilities of
notaries public, commissioners, or justices of the peace. The first
edition of the manual shall be prepared by September 1, 2007.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state may use the funds from the portion of the
fees paid by applicants for commissions as a notary public or a justice
of the peace deposited into the fund established in RSA 5:10-b for the
preparation, printing, and distribution of a notary public/justice of
the peace manual, other education of notaries public/justices of the
peace, or both, and the acquisition, development, and maintenance of
electronic records systems that will enhance the efficiency of the
management of public records maintained by his or her office and to
enhance the ease of submitting applications and renewals. The secretary
of state shall enter into an agreement with the attorney general to
provide funds from the fund established in RSA 5:10-b for the use of the
attorney general for legal services related to the notary public/justice
of the peace manual and for the enforcement of laws relating to notary
public or justice of the peace misconduct.

**Source.** 2005, 118:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2006. 2010, 180:7, eff. June 21,
2010.
