---
title: 'CHAPTER 463-A UNIFORM TRANSFERS TO MINORS ACT'
---

TITLE XLIV
                                             
GUARDIANS AND CONSERVATORS
==========================

CHAPTER 463-A
                                             
UNIFORM TRANSFERS TO MINORS ACT
-------------------------------

### Section 463-A:1

 **463-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adult'' means an individual who has attained the age of 21
years.
                                             
 II. "Benefit plan'' means an employer's plan for the benefit of an
employee or partner.
                                             
 III. "Broker'' means a person lawfully engaged in the business of
effecting transactions in securities or commodities for the person's own
account or for the account of others.
                                             
 IV. "Conservator'' means a person appointed or qualified by a court
to act as general, limited, or temporary guardian of a minor's property
or a person legally authorized to perform substantially the same
functions.
                                             
 V. "Court'' means the probate court.
                                             
 VI. "Custodial property'' means any interest in property transferred
to a custodian under this chapter and the income from and proceeds of
that interest in property.
                                             
 VII. "Custodian'' means a person so designated under RSA 463-A:9 or
a successor or substitute custodian designated under RSA 463-A:18.
                                             
 VIII. "Financial institution'' means a bank, trust company, savings
institution, or credit union, chartered and supervised under state or
federal law.
                                             
 IX. "Legal representative'' means an individual's personal
representative or conservator.
                                             
 X. "Member of the minor's family'' means the minor's parent,
stepparent, spouse, grandparent, brother, sister, uncle, or aunt,
whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption.
                                             
 XI. "Minor'' means an individual who has not attained the age of 21
years.
                                             
 XII. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, organization, or
other legal entity.
                                             
 XIII. "Personal representative'' means an executor, administrator,
successor personal representative, or special administrator of a
decedent's estate or a person legally authorized to perform
substantially the same functions.
                                             
 XIII-a. "Qualified minor's trust'' means any trust, including a
trust created by the custodian, of which the minor is the sole
beneficiary and that satisfies the requirements of section 2503(c) of
the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations implementing that
section.
                                             
 XIV. "State'' includes any state of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territory or
possession subject to the legislative authority of the United States.
                                             
 XV. "Transfer'' means a transaction that creates custodial property
under RSA 463-A:9.
                                             
 XVI. "Transferor'' means a person who makes a transfer under this
chapter.
                                             
 XVII. "Trust company'' means a financial institution, corporation,
or other legal entity, authorized to exercise general trust powers.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985. 2007, 111:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2008.

### Section 463-A:2

 **463-A:2 Scope and Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter applies to a transfer that refers to this chapter in
the designation under RSA 463-A:9, I, by which the transfer is made if
at the time of the transfer, the transferor, the minor, or the custodian
is a resident of this state or the custodial property is located in this
state. The custodianship so created remains subject to this chapter
despite a subsequent change in residence of a transferor, the minor, or
the custodian, or the removal of custodial property from this state.
                                             
 II. A person designated as custodian under this chapter is subject
to personal jurisdiction in this state with respect to any matter
relating to the custodianship.
                                             
 III. A transfer that purports to be made and which is valid under
the Uniform Transfers to Minors Act, the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or
a substantially similar act, of another state is governed by the law of
the designated state and may be executed and is enforceable in this
state if at the time of the transfer, the transferor, the minor, or the
custodian is a resident of the designated state or the custodial
property is located in the designated state.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:3

 **463-A:3 Nomination of Custodian. –**
                                             
 I. A person having the right to designate the recipient of property
transferable upon the occurrence of a future event may revocably
nominate a custodian to receive the property for a minor beneficiary
upon the occurrence of the event by naming the custodian followed in
substance by the words: "as custodian for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of
minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act.'' The
nomination may name one or more persons as substitute custodians to whom
the property must be transferred, in the order named, if the first
nominated custodian dies before the transfer or is unable, declines, or
is ineligible to serve. The nomination may be made in a will, a trust, a
deed, an instrument exercising a power of appointment, or in a writing
designating a beneficiary of contractual rights which is registered with
or delivered to the payor, issuer, or other obligor of the contractual
rights.
                                             
 II. A custodian nominated under this section must be a person to
whom a transfer of property of that kind may be made under RSA 463-A:9,
I.
                                             
 III. The nomination of a custodian under this section does not
create custodial property until the nominating instrument becomes
irrevocable or a transfer to the nominated custodian is completed under
RSA 463-A:9. Unless the nomination of a custodian has been revoked, upon
the occurrence of the future event, the custodianship becomes effective
and the custodian shall enforce a transfer of the custodial property
pursuant to RSA 463-A:9.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:4

 **463-A:4 Transfer by Gift or Exercise of Power of Appointment. –**
A person may make a transfer by irrevocable gift to, or the irrevocable
exercise of a power of appointment in favor of, a custodian for the
benefit of a minor pursuant to RSA 463-A:9.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:5

 **463-A:5 Transfer Authorized by Will or Trust. –**
                                             
 I. A personal representative or trustee may make an irrevocable
transfer pursuant to RSA 463-A:9 to a custodian for the benefit of a
minor as authorized in the governing will or trust.
                                             
 II. If the testator or settlor has nominated a custodian under RSA
463-A:3 to receive the custodial property, the transfer must be made to
that person.
                                             
 III. If the testator or settlor has not nominated a custodian under
RSA 463-A:3, or all persons so nominated as custodian die before the
transfer or are unable, decline, or are ineligible to serve, the
personal representative or the trustee, as the case may be, shall
designate the custodian from among those eligible to serve as custodian
for property of that kind under RSA 463-A:9, I.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:6

 **463-A:6 Other Transfer by Fiduciary. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to paragraph III, a personal representative or trustee
may make an irrevocable transfer to another adult or trust company as
custodian for the benefit of a minor pursuant to RSA 463-A:9, in the
absence of a will or under a will or trust that does not contain an
authorization to do so.
                                             
 II. Subject to paragraph III, a conservator may make an irrevocable
transfer to another adult or trust company as custodian for the benefit
of the minor pursuant to RSA 463-A:9.
                                             
 III. A transfer under paragraph I or II may be made only if:
                                             
 (a) The personal representative, trustee, or conservator
considers the transfer to be in the best interest of the minor;
                                             
 (b) The transfer is not prohibited by or inconsistent with
provisions of the applicable will, trust agreement, or other governing
instrument; and
                                             
 (c) The transfer is less than or equal to 
                                             $10,000 in value;
otherwise a guardianship over the estate of the minor shall be required
by the probate court pursuant to RSA 463, unless otherwise ordered by
the court.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985. 2005, 68:1, eff. July 22,
2005.

### Section 463-A:7

 **463-A:7 Transfer by Obligor. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to paragraphs II and III, a person not subject to RSA
463-A:5 or 6 who holds property of or owes a liquidated debt to a minor
not having a conservator may make an irrevocable transfer to a custodian
for the benefit of the minor pursuant to RSA 463-A:9.
                                             
 II. If a person having the right to do so under RSA 463-A:3 has
nominated a custodian under that section to receive the custodial
property, the transfer must be made to that person.
                                             
 III. If no custodian has been nominated under RSA 463-A:3, or all
persons so nominated as custodian die before the transfer or are unable,
decline, or are ineligible to serve, a transfer under this section may
be made to an adult member of the minor's family or to a trust company
unless the property exceeds 
                                             $10,000 in value.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:8

 **463-A:8 Receipt for Custodial Property. –** A written
acknowledgment of delivery by a custodian constitutes a sufficient
receipt and discharge for custodial property transferred to the
custodian pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:9

 **463-A:9 Manner of Creating Custodial Property and Effecting
Transfer; Designation of Initial Custodian; Control. –**
                                             
 I. Custodial property is created and a transfer is made whenever:
                                             
 (a) An uncertificated security or a certificated security in
registered form is either:
                                             
 (1) registered in the name of the transferor, an adult other
than the transferor, or a trust company, followed in substance by the
words: "as custodian for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the
New Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act''; or
                                             
 (2) delivered if in certificated form, or any document
necessary for the transfer of an uncertificated security is delivered,
together with any necessary endorsement to an adult other than the
transferor or to a trust company as custodian, accompanied by an
instrument in substantially the form set forth in paragraph II;
                                             
 (b) Money is paid or delivered to a broker or financial
institution for credit to an account in the name of the transferor, an
adult other than the transferor, or a trust company, followed in
substance by the words: "as custodian for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of
minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act'';
                                             
 (c) The ownership of a life or endowment insurance policy or
annuity contract is either:
                                             
 (1) registered with the issuer in the name of the transferor,
an adult other than the transferor, or a trust company, followed in
substance by the words: "as custodian for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of
minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act''; or
                                             
 (2) assigned in a writing delivered to an adult other than the
transferor or to a trust company whose name in the assignment is
followed in substance by the words: "as custodian for

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform
Transfers to Minors Act'';
                                             
 (d) An irrevocable exercise of a power of appointment or an
irrevocable present right to future payment under a contract is the
subject of a written notification delivered to the payor, issuer, or
other obligor that the right is transferred to the transferor, an adult
other than the transferor, or a trust company, whose name in the
notification is followed in substance by the words: "as custodian for

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under New Hampshire Uniform
Transfers to Minors Act'';
                                             
 (e) An interest in real property is recorded in the name of the
transferor, an adult other than the transferor, or a trust company,
followed in substance by the words: "as custodian for

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform
Transfers to Minors Act'';
                                             
 (f) A certificate of title issued by a department or agency of a
state or of the United States which evidences title to tangible personal
property is either:
                                             
 (1) issued in the name of the transferor, an adult other than
the transferor, or a trust company, followed in substance by the words:
"as custodian for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the New
Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act''; or
                                             
 (2) delivered to an adult other than the transferor or to a
trust company, endorsed to that person followed in substance by the
words: "as custodian for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the
New Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act''; or
                                             
 (g) An interest in any property not described in subparagraphs
(a) through (f) is transferred to an adult other than the transferor or
to a trust company by a written instrument in substantially the form set
forth in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. An instrument in the following form satisfies the requirements
of subparagraphs I(a)(2) and I(g):

**"TRANSFER UNDER THE NEW HAMPSHIRE UNIFORM TRANSFERS TO MINORS ACT**


                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of transferor or name and
representative capacity if a fiduciary) hereby transfer to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of custodian), as custodian for

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform
Transfers to Minors Act, the following: (insert a description of the
custodial property sufficient to identify it).
                                             
Date: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _

    ____________________ 
     (Signature) 


                                             

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of custodian) acknowledges receipt of the
property described above as custodian for the minor named above under
the New Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act.
                                             
Dated: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _

    ____________________  
     (Signature of Custodian) 


                                             
 III. A transferor shall place the custodian in control of the
custodial property as soon as practicable.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:10

 **463-A:10 Single Custodianship. –** A transfer may be made only for
one minor, and only one person may be the custodian. All custodial
property held under the provisions of this chapter by the same custodian
for the benefit of the same minor constitutes a single custodianship.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:11

 **463-A:11 Validity and Effect of Transfer. –**
                                             
 I. The validity of a transfer made in a manner prescribed by the
provisions of this chapter shall not be affected by:
                                             
 (a) Failure of the transferor to comply with RSA 463-A:9, III,
concerning the possession and control;
                                             
 (b) Designation of an ineligible custodian, except designation of
the transferor in the case of property for which the transferor is
ineligible to serve as custodian under RSA 463-A:9, I; or
                                             
 (c) Death or incapacity of a person nominated under RSA 463-A:3
or designated under RSA 463-A:9 as custodian or the disclaimer of the
office by that person.
                                             
 II. A transfer made pursuant to RSA 463-A:9 is irrevocable, and the
custodial property is indefeasibly vested in the minor, but the
custodian has all the rights, powers, duties, and authority provided in
this chapter, and neither the minor nor the minor's legal representative
has any right, power, duty, or authority with respect to the custodial
property except as provided in this chapter.
                                             
 III. By making a transfer, the transferor incorporates in the
disposition all the provisions of this chapter and grants to the
custodian, and to any third person dealing with a person designated as
custodian, the respective powers, rights, and immunities provided in
this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:12

 **463-A:12 Care of Custodial Property. –**
                                             
 I. A custodian shall:
                                             
 (a) Take control of custodial property;
                                             
 (b) Register or record title to custodial property if
appropriate; and
                                             
 (c) Collect, hold, manage, invest, and reinvest custodial
property.
                                             
 II. In dealing with custodial property, a custodian shall observe
the standard of care that would be observed by a prudent person dealing
with property of another and is not limited by any other statute
restricting investments by fiduciaries. If a custodian has a special
skill or expertise or is named custodian on the basis of representations
of a special skill or expertise, the custodian shall use that skill or
expertise. However, a custodian, in the custodian's discretion and
without liability to the minor or the minor's estate, may retain any
custodial property received from a transferor.
                                             
 III. A custodian may invest in or pay premiums on life insurance or
endowment policies on:
                                             
 (a) The life of the minor only if the minor or the minor's estate
is the sole beneficiary; or
                                             
 (b) The life of another person in whom the minor has an insurable
interest only to the extent that the minor, the minor's estate, or the
custodian in the capacity of custodian, is the irrevocable beneficiary.
                                             
 IV. A custodian at all times shall keep custodial property separate
and distinct from all other property in a manner sufficient to identify
it clearly as custodial property of the minor. Custodial property
consisting of an undivided interest is so identified if the minor's
interest is held as a tenant in common and is fixed. Custodial property
subject to recordation is so identified if it is recorded, and custodial
property subject to registration is so identified if it is either
registered, or held in an account designated, in the name of the
custodian, followed in substance by the words: "as a custodian for

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (name of minor) under the New Hampshire Uniform
Transfers to Minors Act.''
                                             
 V. A custodian shall keep records of all transactions with respect
to custodial property, including information necessary for the
preparation of the minor's tax returns, and shall make them available
for inspection at reasonable intervals by a parent or legal
representative of the minor or by the minor if the minor has attained
the age of 14 years.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:13

 **463-A:13 Powers of Custodian. –**
                                             
 I. A custodian, acting in a custodial capacity, has all the rights,
powers, and authority over custodial property that unmarried adult
owners have over their own property, but a custodian may exercise those
rights, powers, and authority in that capacity only.
                                             
 II. This section does not relieve a custodian from liability for
breach of the provisions of RSA 463-A:12.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:14

 **463-A:14 Use of Custodial Property. –**
                                             
 I. A custodian may deliver or pay to the minor or expend for the
minor's benefit so much of the custodial property as the custodian
considers advisable for the use and benefit of the minor, without court
order and without regard to:
                                             
 (a) The duty or ability of the custodian personally or of any
other person to support the minor; or
                                             
 (b) Any other income or property of the minor which may be
applicable or available for that purpose.
                                             
 II. On petition of an interested person or the minor if the minor
has attained the age of 14 years, the court may order the custodian to
deliver or pay to the minor or expend for the minor's benefit so much of
the custodial property as the court considers advisable for the use and
benefit of the minor.
                                             
 III. A delivery, payment, or expenditure under this section is in
addition to, not in substitution for, and does not affect any obligation
of a person to support the minor.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:15

 **463-A:15 Custodian's Expenses, Compensation, and Bond. –**
                                             
 I. A custodian is entitled to reimbursement from custodial property
for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of the custodian's
duties.
                                             
 II. Except for one who is a transferor under RSA 463-A:4, a
custodian has a non-cumulative election during each calendar year to
charge reasonable compensation for services performed during that year.
                                             
 III. Except as provided in RSA 463-A:18, VI, a custodian need not
give a bond.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:16

 **463-A:16 Exemption of Third Person From Liability. –** A third
person in good faith and without court order may act on the instructions
of or otherwise deal with any person purporting to make a transfer or
purporting to act in the capacity of a custodian and, in the absence of
knowledge, is not responsible for determining:
                                             
 I. The validity of the purported custodian's designation;
                                             
 II. The propriety of, or the authority under this chapter for, any
act of the purported custodian;
                                             
 III. The validity or propriety under this chapter of any instrument
or instructions executed or given either by the person purporting to
make a transfer or by the purported custodian; or
                                             
 IV. The propriety of the application of any property of the minor
delivered to the purported custodian.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:17

 **463-A:17 Liability to Third Persons. –**
                                             
 I. A claim based on a contract entered into by a custodian acting in
a custodial capacity, an obligation arising from the ownership or
control of custodial property, or a tort committed during the
custodianship, may be asserted against the custodial property by
proceeding against the custodian in the custodial capacity, whether or
not the custodian or the minor is personally liable therefor.
                                             
 II. A custodian is not personally liable:
                                             
 (a) On a contract properly entered into in the custodial capacity
unless the custodian fails to reveal that capacity and to identify the
custodianship in the contract; or
                                             
 (b) For an obligation arising from control of custodial property
or for a tort committed during the custodianship unless the custodian is
personally at fault.
                                             
 III. A minor is not personally liable for an obligation arising from
ownership of custodial property or for a tort committed during the
custodianship unless the minor is personally at fault.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:18

 **463-A:18 Renunciation, Resignation, Death, or Removal of
Custodian; Designation of Successor Custodian. –**
                                             
 I. If the event giving rise to a transfer has not occurred and no
substitute custodian able, willing, and eligible to serve was nominated
under RSA 463-A:3, the person who made the nomination may nominate a
substitute custodian under RSA 463-A:3, otherwise the transferor or the
transferor's legal representative shall designate a substitute custodian
at the time of the transfer, in either case from among the persons
eligible to serve as custodian for that kind of property under RSA
463-A:9, I. The custodian so designated has the rights of a successor
custodian.
                                             
 II. A custodian at any time may designate a trust company or an
adult other than a transferor under RSA 463-A:4 as successor custodian
by executing and dating an instrument of designation before a
subscribing witness other than the successor. If the instrument of
designation does not contain or is not accompanied by the resignation of
the custodian, the designation of the successor does not take effect
until the custodian resigns, dies, becomes incapacitated, or is
removed.
                                             
 III. A custodian may resign at any time by delivering written notice
to the minor if the minor has attained the age of 14 years and to the
successor custodian and by delivering the custodial property to the
successor custodian.
                                             
 IV. If a custodian is ineligible, dies, or becomes incapacitated
without having effectively designated a successor and the minor has
attained the age of 14 years, the minor may designate as successor
custodian, in the manner prescribed in paragraph II, an adult member of
the minor's family, a conservator of the minor, or a trust company. If
the minor has not attained the age of 14 years or fails to act within 60
days after the ineligibility, death, or incapacity, the conservator of
the minor becomes successor custodian. If the minor has no conservator
or the conservator declines to act, the transferor, the legal
representative of the transferor or of the custodian, an adult member of
the minor's family, or any other interested person may petition the
court to designate a successor custodian.
                                             
 V. A custodian who declines to serve under paragraph I, or resigns
under paragraph III, or the legal representative of a deceased or
incapacitated custodian, as soon as practicable, shall put the custodial
property and records in the possession and control of the successor
custodian. The successor custodian by action may enforce the obligation
to deliver custodial property and records and becomes responsible for
each item as received.
                                             
 VI. A transferor, the legal representative of a transferor, an adult
member of the minor's family, a guardian of the person of the minor, the
conservator of the minor, or the minor if the minor has attained the age
of 14 years may petition the court to remove the custodian for cause and
designate a successor custodian other than a transferor under RSA
463-A:4 or to require the custodian to give appropriate bond.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:19

 **463-A:19 Accounting by and Determination of Liability of
Custodian. –**
                                             
 I. A minor who has attained the age of 14 years, the minor's
guardian of the person or legal representative, an adult member of the
minor's family, a transferor, or a transferor's legal representative may
petition the court for an accounting by the custodian or the custodian's
legal representative, or for a determination of responsibility, as
between the custodial property and the custodian personally, for claims
against the custodial property unless the responsibility has been
adjudicated in an action under RSA 463-A:17 to which the minor or the
minor's legal representative was a party.
                                             
 II. A successor custodian may petition the court for an accounting
by the predecessor custodian.
                                             
 III. The court, in a proceeding under this chapter or in any other
proceeding, may require or permit the custodian or the custodian's legal
representative to account.
                                             
 IV. If a custodian is removed under RSA 463-A:18, VI, the court
shall require an accounting and order delivery of the custodial property
and records to the successor custodian and the execution of all
instruments required for transfer of the custodial property.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:20

 **463-A:20 Termination of Custodianship. –**
                                             
 I. The custodian shall transfer in an appropriate manner the
custodial property to the minor or to the minor's estate upon the
earlier of:
                                             
 (a) The minor's attainment of 21 years of age with respect to
custodial property transferred under RSA 463-A:4 or 463-A:5;
                                             
 (b) The minor's attainment of 18 years of age with respect to
custodial property transferred under RSA 463-A:6 or 463-A:7; or
                                             
 (c) The minor's death.
                                             
 II. Paragraph I applies to all custodial property held under the
provisions of this chapter, whether such custodial property was
transferred to the custodian before, on, or after June 30, 1989.
                                             
 III. At any time, a custodian may transfer part or all of the
custodial property to a qualified minor's trust, as defined in RSA
463-A:1, XIII-a, without a court order. Such a transfer terminates the
custodianship to the extent of the transfer.

**Source.** 1989, 98:1, eff. June 30, 1989. 2007, 111:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2008.

### Section 463-A:21

 **463-A:21 Applicability. –** This chapter applies to a transfer
within the scope of RSA 463-A:2 made after July 30, 1985 if:
                                             
 I. The transfer purports to have been made under the New Hampshire
Uniform Gifts to Minors Law; or
                                             
 II. The instrument by which the transfer purports to have been made
uses in substance the designation "as custodian under the Uniform Gifts
to Minors Act'' or "as custodian under the Uniform Transfers to Minors
Act'' of any other state, and the application of this chapter is
necessary to validate the transfer.
                                             
 III. To the extent that this chapter, by virtue of RSA 463-A:23, II,
does not apply to transfers made in a manner prescribed in the New
Hampshire Uniform Gifts to Minors Law or to the powers, duties, and
immunities conferred by transfers in that manner upon custodians and
persons dealing with custodians, the repeal of the New Hampshire Uniform
Gifts to Minors Law does not affect those transfers or those powers,
duties, and immunities.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:22

 **463-A:22 Construction. –** Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA
21:44 and RSA 21-B, in construing this chapter, the provisions of RSA
463-A:1 relative to the definition of "adult'' and "minor'' shall apply.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:23

 **463-A:23 Effect on Existing Custodianships. –**
                                             
 I. Any transfer of custodial property as now defined in this chapter
made before July 30, 1985 is validated notwithstanding that there was no
specific authority in the New Hampshire Uniform Gifts to Minors Law for
the coverage of custodial property of that kind or for a transfer from
that source at the time the transfer was made.
                                             
 II. This chapter applies to all transfers made before July 30, 1985
in a manner and form prescribed in the New Hampshire Uniform Gifts to
Minors Law, except insofar as the application impairs constitutionally
vested rights or extends the duration of custodianships in existence on
July 30, 1985.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:24

 **463-A:24 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** This
chapter shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose
to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter
among states enacting it.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:25

 **463-A:25 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the "New
Hampshire Uniform Transfers to Minors Act.''

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 463-A:26

 **463-A:26 Severability. –** If any provisions of this chapter or
its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end provisions of this chapter are severable.

**Source.** 1985, 197:1, eff. July 30, 1985.
