---
title: |
    CHAPTER 464-C UNIFORM ADULT GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTIVE PROCEEDINGS
    JURISDICTION ACT
---

TITLE XLIV
                                             
GUARDIANS AND CONSERVATORS
==========================

CHAPTER 464-C
                                             
UNIFORM ADULT GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTIVE PROCEEDINGS JURISDICTION ACT
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Article 1
                                             
General Provisions
------------------

### Section 464-C:1

 **464-C:1 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Adult Guardianship and Protective Proceedings Jurisdiction Act (2007).

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:2

 **464-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adult'' means an individual who has attained 18 years of age.
                                             
 II. "Conservator'' means a person appointed by the court to
administer the property of an adult, including a person appointed under
RSA 464-A, and a guardian of the estate as defined in RSA 464-A.
                                             
 III. "Court'' means circuit court probate division.
                                             
 IV. "Guardian'' means a person appointed by the court to make
decisions regarding the person of an adult, including a person appointed
under RSA 464-A, and a guardian of the person as defined in RSA 464-A.
                                             
 V. "Guardianship order'' means an order appointing a guardian.
                                             
 VI. "Guardianship proceeding'' means a judicial proceeding in which
an order for the appointment of a guardian is sought or has been
issued.
                                             
 VII. "Incapacitated person'' means an adult for whom a guardian has
been appointed.
                                             
 VIII. "Party'' means the respondent, petitioner, guardian,
conservator, or any other person allowed by the court to participate in
a guardianship or protective proceeding.
                                             
 IX. "Person,'' except in the term incapacitated person or protected
person, means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture,
public corporation, government or governmental subdivision, agency, or
instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity.
                                             
 X. "Protected person'' means an adult for whom a protective order
has been issued.
                                             
 XI. "Protective order'' means an order appointing a conservator or
other order related to management of an adult's property.
                                             
 XII. "Protective proceeding'' means a judicial proceeding in which a
protective order is sought or has been issued.
                                             
 XIII. "Record'' means information that is inscribed on a tangible
medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is
retrievable in perceivable form.
                                             
 XIV. "Respondent'' means an adult for whom a protective order or the
appointment of a guardian is sought.
                                             
 XV. "State'' means a state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, a federally
recognized Indian tribe, or any territory or insular possession subject
to the jurisdiction of the United States.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:3

 **464-C:3 International Application of Chapter. –** A court of this
state may treat a foreign country as if it were a state for the purpose
of applying this article and articles 2, 3, and 5.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:4

 **464-C:4 Communication Between Courts. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state may communicate with a court in another
state concerning a proceeding arising under this chapter. The court may
allow the parties to participate in the communication. Except as
otherwise provided in paragraph II, the court shall make a record of the
communication. The record may be limited to the fact that the
communication occurred.
                                             
 II. Courts may communicate concerning schedules, calendars, court
records, and other administrative matters without making a record.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:5

 **464-C:5 Cooperation Between Courts. –**
                                             
 I. In a guardianship or protective proceeding in this state, a court
of this state may request the appropriate court of another state to do
any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Hold an evidentiary hearing.
                                             
 (b) Order a person in that state to produce evidence or give
testimony pursuant to procedures of that state.
                                             
 (c) Order that an evaluation or assessment be made of the
respondent.
                                             
 (d) Order any appropriate investigation of a person involved in a
proceeding.
                                             
 (e) Forward to the court of this state a certified copy of the
transcript or other record of a hearing under subparagraph (a) or any
other proceeding, any evidence otherwise produced under subparagraph
(b), and any evaluation or assessment prepared in compliance with an
order under subparagraph (c) or (d).
                                             
 (f) Issue any order necessary to assure the appearance in the
proceeding of a person whose presence is necessary for the court to make
a determination, including the respondent or the incapacitated or
protected person.
                                             
 (g) Issue an order authorizing the release of medical, financial,
criminal, or other relevant information in that state, including
protected health information as defined in 45 C.F.R. section 160.103, as
amended.
                                             
 II. If a court of another state in which a guardianship or
protective proceeding is pending requests assistance of the kind
provided in paragraph I, a court of this state has jurisdiction for the
limited purpose of granting the request or making reasonable efforts to
comply with the request.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:6

 **464-C:6 Taking Testimony in Another State. –**
                                             
 I. In a guardianship or protective proceeding, in addition to other
procedures that may be available, testimony of a witness who is located
in another state may be offered by deposition or other means allowable
in this state for testimony taken in another state. The court on its own
motion may order that the testimony of a witness be taken in another
state and may prescribe the manner in which and the terms upon which the
testimony is to be taken.
                                             
 II. In a guardianship or protective proceeding, a court in this
state may permit a witness located in another state to be deposed or to
testify by telephone or audiovisual or other electronic means. A court
of this state shall cooperate with the court of the other state in
designating an appropriate location for the deposition or testimony.
                                             
 III. Documentary evidence transmitted from another state to a court
of this state by technological means that do not produce an original
writing may not be excluded from evidence on an objection based on the
best evidence rule.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Article 2
                                             
Jurisdiction
------------

### Section 464-C:7

 **464-C:7 Definitions; Significant Connection Factors. –**
                                             
 I. In this chapter:
                                             
 (a) "Emergency'' means a circumstance that likely will result in
substantial harm to a respondent's health, safety, or welfare, and for
which the appointment of a guardian is necessary because no other person
has authority and is willing to act on the respondent's behalf.
                                             
 (b) "Home state'' means the state in which the respondent was
physically present, including any period of temporary absence, for at
least 6 consecutive months immediately before the filing of a petition
for a protective order or the appointment of a guardian; or if none, the
state in which the respondent was physically present, including any
period of temporary absence, for at least 6 consecutive months ending
within the 6 months prior to the filing of the petition.
                                             
 (c) "Significant-connection state'' means a state, other than the
home state, with which a respondent has a significant connection other
than mere physical presence and in which substantial evidence concerning
the respondent is available.
                                             
 II. In determining under RSA 464-C:7 and RSA 464-C:16, V whether a
respondent has a significant connection with a particular state, the
court shall consider:
                                             
 (a) The location of the respondent's family and other persons
required to be notified of the guardianship or protective proceeding;
                                             
 (b) The length of time the respondent at any time was physically
present in the state and the duration of any absence;
                                             
 (c) The location of the respondent's property; and
                                             
 (d) The extent to which the respondent has ties to the state such
as voting registration, state or local tax return filing, vehicle
registration, driver's license, social relationship, and receipt of
services.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:8

 **464-C:8 Exclusive Basis. –** This chapter provides the exclusive
jurisdictional basis for a court to address and adjudicate a case
falling within the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:9

 **464-C:9 Jurisdiction. –** A court of this state has jurisdiction
to appoint a guardian or issue a protective order for a respondent if:
                                             
 I. This state is the respondent's home state.
                                             
 II. On the date the petition is filed, this state is a
significant-connection state and:
                                             
 (a) The respondent does not have a home state or a court of the
respondent's home state has declined to exercise jurisdiction because
this state is a more appropriate forum; or
                                             
 (b) The respondent has a home state, a petition for an
appointment or order is not pending in a court of that state or another
significant-connection state, and, before the court makes the
appointment or issues the order:
                                             
 (1) A petition for an appointment or order is not filed in the
respondent's home state;
                                             
 (2) An objection to the court's jurisdiction is not filed by a
person required to be notified of the proceeding; and
                                             
 (3) The court in this state concludes that it is an
appropriate forum under the factors set forth in RSA 464-C:12;
                                             
 III. This state does not have jurisdiction under either paragraph I
or II, the respondent's home state and all significant-connection states
have declined to exercise jurisdiction because this state is the more
appropriate forum, and jurisdiction in this state is consistent with the
constitutions of this state and the United States; or
                                             
 IV. The requirements for special jurisdiction under RSA 464-C:10 are
met.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:10

 **464-C:10 Special Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state lacking jurisdiction under RSA 464-C:9,
I-III has special jurisdiction to do any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Appoint a guardian in an emergency for a term not exceeding
90 days for a respondent who is physically present in this state.
                                             
 (b) Issue a protective order with respect to real or tangible
personal property located in this state.
                                             
 (c) Appoint a guardian or conservator for an incapacitated or
protected person for whom a provisional order to transfer the proceeding
from another state has been issued under procedures similar to RSA
464-C:16.
                                             
 II. If a petition for the appointment of a guardian in an emergency
is brought in this state and this state was not the respondent's home
state on the date the petition was filed, the court shall dismiss the
proceeding at the request of the court of the home state, if any,
whether dismissal is requested before or after the emergency
appointment.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:11

 **464-C:11 Exclusive and Continuing Jurisdiction. –** Except as
otherwise provided in RSA 464-C:10, a court that has appointed a
guardian or issued a protective order consistent with this chapter has
exclusive and continuing jurisdiction over the proceeding until it is
terminated by the court or the appointment or order expires by its own
terms.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:12

 **464-C:12 Appropriate Forum. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state having jurisdiction under RSA 464-C:9 to
appoint a guardian or issue a protective order may decline to exercise
its jurisdiction if it determines at any time that a court of another
state is a more appropriate forum.
                                             
 II. If a court of this state declines to exercise its jurisdiction
under paragraph I, it shall either dismiss or stay the proceeding. The
court may impose any condition the court considers just and proper,
including the condition that a petition for the appointment of a
guardian or issuance of a protective order be filed promptly in another
state.
                                             
 III. In determining whether it is an appropriate forum, the court
shall consider all relevant factors, including:
                                             
 (a) Any expressed preference of the respondent;
                                             
 (b) Whether abuse, neglect, or exploitation of the respondent has
occurred or is likely to occur and which state could best protect the
respondent from the abuse, neglect, or exploitation;
                                             
 (c) The length of time the respondent was physically present in
or was a legal resident of this or another state;
                                             
 (d) The distance of the respondent from the court in each state;
                                             
 (e) The financial circumstances of the respondent's estate;
                                             
 (f) The nature and location of the evidence;
                                             
 (g) The ability of the court in each state to decide the issue
expeditiously and the procedures necessary to present evidence;
                                             
 (h) The familiarity of the court of each state with the facts and
issues in the proceeding; and
                                             
 (i) If an appointment was made, the court's ability to monitor
the conduct of the guardian or conservator.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:13

 **464-C:13 Jurisdiction Declined by Reason of Conduct. –**
                                             
 I. If at any time a court of this state determines that it acquired
jurisdiction to appoint a guardian or issue a protective order because
of unjustifiable conduct, the court may:
                                             
 (a) Decline to exercise jurisdiction;
                                             
 (b) Exercise jurisdiction for the limited purpose of fashioning
an appropriate remedy to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the
respondent or the protection of the respondent's property or prevent a
repetition of the unjustifiable conduct, including staying the
proceeding until a petition for the appointment of a guardian or
issuance of a protective order is filed in a court of another state
having jurisdiction; or
                                             
 (c) Continue to exercise jurisdiction after considering:
                                             
 (1) The extent to which the respondent and all persons
required to be notified of the proceedings have acquiesced in the
exercise of the court's jurisdiction;
                                             
 (2) Whether it is a more appropriate forum than the court of
any other state under the factors set forth in RSA 464-C:12, III; and
                                             
 (3) Whether the court of any other state would have
jurisdiction under factual circumstances in substantial conformity with
the jurisdictional standards of RSA 464-C:9.
                                             
 II. If a court of this state determines that it acquired
jurisdiction to appoint a guardian or issue a protective order because a
party seeking to invoke its jurisdiction engaged in unjustifiable
conduct, it may assess against that party necessary and reasonable
expenses, including attorney's fees, investigative fees, court costs,
communication expenses, witness fees and expenses, and travel expenses.
The court may not assess fees, costs, or expenses of any kind against
this state or a governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of
this state unless authorized by law other than this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:14

 **464-C:14 Notice of Proceeding. –** If a petition for the
appointment of a guardian or issuance of a protective order is brought
in this state and this state was not the respondent's home state on the
date the petition was filed, in addition to complying with the notice
requirements of this state, notice of the petition shall be given to
those persons who would be entitled to notice of the petition if a
proceeding were brought in the respondent's home state. The notice shall
be given in the same manner as notice is required to be given in this
state.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:15

 **464-C:15 Proceedings in More Than One State. –** Except for a
petition for the appointment of a guardian in an emergency or issuance
of a protective order limited to property located in this state under
RSA 464-C:10, I(a) or (b), if a petition for the appointment of a
guardian or issuance of a protective order is filed in this state and in
another state and neither petition has been dismissed or withdrawn, the
following rules apply:
                                             
 I. If the court in this state has jurisdiction under RSA 464-C:9, it
may proceed with the case unless a court in another state acquires
jurisdiction under provisions similar to RSA 464-C:9 before the
appointment or issuance of the order.
                                             
 II. If the court in this state does not have jurisdiction under RSA
464-C:9, whether at the time the petition is filed or at any time before
the appointment or issuance of the order, the court shall stay the
proceeding and communicate with the court in the other state. If the
court in the other state has jurisdiction, the court in this state shall
dismiss the petition unless the court in the other state determines that
the court in this state is a more appropriate forum.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Article 3
                                             
Transfer of Guardianship or Conservatorship
-------------------------------------------

### Section 464-C:16

 **464-C:16 Transfer of Guardianship or Conservatorship to Another
State. –**
                                             
 I. A guardian or conservator appointed in this state may petition
the court to transfer the guardianship or conservatorship to another
state.
                                             
 II. Notice of a petition under paragraph I shall be given to the
persons that would be entitled to notice of a petition in this state for
the appointment of a guardian or conservator.
                                             
 III. On the court's own motion or on request of the guardian or
conservator, the incapacitated or protected person, or other person
required to be notified of the petition, the court shall hold a hearing
on a petition filed pursuant to paragraph I.
                                             
 IV. The court shall issue an order provisionally granting a petition
to transfer a guardianship and shall direct the guardian to petition for
guardianship in the other state if the court is satisfied that the
guardianship will be accepted by the court in the other state and the
court finds that:
                                             
 (a) The incapacitated person is physically present in or is
reasonably expected to move permanently to the other state;
                                             
 (b) An objection to the transfer has not been made or, if an
objection has been made, the objector has not established that the
transfer would be contrary to the interests of the incapacitated person;
and
                                             
 (c) Plans for care and services for the incapacitated person in
the other state are reasonable and sufficient.
                                             
 V. The court shall issue a provisional order granting a petition to
transfer a conservatorship and shall direct the conservator to petition
for conservatorship in the other state if the court is satisfied that
the conservatorship will be accepted by the court of the other state and
the court finds that:
                                             
 (a) The protected person is physically present in or is
reasonably expected to move permanently to the other state, or the
protected person has a significant connection to the other state
considering the factors in RSA 464-C:7, II;
                                             
 (b) An objection to the transfer has not been made or, if an
objection has been made, the objector has not established that the
transfer would be contrary to the interests of the protected person;
and
                                             
 (c) Adequate arrangements will be made for management of the
protected person's property.
                                             
 VI. The court shall issue a final order confirming the transfer and
terminating the guardianship or conservatorship upon its receipt of:
                                             
 (a) A provisional order accepting the proceeding from the court
to which the proceeding is to be transferred which is issued under
provisions similar to RSA 464-C:17; and
                                             
 (b) The documents required to terminate a guardianship or
conservatorship in this state.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:17

 **464-C:17 Accepting Guardianship or Conservatorship Transferred
From Another State. –**
                                             
 I. To confirm transfer of a guardianship or conservatorship
transferred to this state under provisions similar to RSA 464-C:16, the
guardian or conservator shall petition the court in this state to accept
the guardianship or conservatorship. The petition shall include a
certified copy of the other state's provisional order of transfer.
                                             
 II. Notice of a petition under paragraph I shall be given to those
persons that would be entitled to notice if the petition were a petition
for the appointment of a guardian or issuance of a protective order in
both the transferring state and this state. The notice shall be given in
the same manner as notice is required to be given in this state.
                                             
 III. On the court's own motion or on request of the guardian or
conservator, the incapacitated or protected person, or other person
required to be notified of the proceeding, the court shall hold a
hearing on a petition filed pursuant to paragraph I.
                                             
 IV. The court shall issue an order provisionally granting a petition
filed under paragraph I unless:
                                             
 (a) An objection is made and the objector establishes that
transfer of the proceeding would be contrary to the interests of the
incapacitated or protected person; or
                                             
 (b) The guardian or conservator is ineligible for appointment in
this state.
                                             
 V. The court shall issue a final order accepting the proceeding and
appointing the guardian or conservator as guardian or conservator in
this state upon its receipt from the court from which the proceeding is
being transferred of a final order issued under provisions similar to
RSA 464-C:16 transferring the proceeding to this state.
                                             
 VI. In issuing a final order under RSA 464-C:17, V, the court shall
recognize a guardianship or conservatorship order from the other state,
including the determination of the incapacitated or protected person's
incapacity and the appointment of the guardian or conservator.
                                             
 VII. Not later than 90 days after issuance of a final order
accepting transfer of a guardianship or conservatorship, the court shall
determine whether the guardianship or conservatorship needs to be
modified to conform to the law of this state and enter orders in
accordance therewith.
                                             
 VIII. The denial by a court of this state of a petition to accept a
guardianship or conservatorship transferred from another state does not
affect the ability of the guardian or conservator to seek appointment as
guardian or conservator in this state under RSA 464-A if the court has
jurisdiction to make an appointment other than by reason of the
provisional order of transfer.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Article 4
                                             
Registration and Recognition of Orders From Other States
--------------------------------------------------------

### Section 464-C:18

 **464-C:18 Registration of Guardianship Orders. –** If a guardian
has been appointed in another state and a petition for the appointment
of a guardian is not pending in this state, the guardian appointed in
the other state, after giving notice to the appointing court of an
intent to register, may register the guardianship order in this state by
filing as a foreign judgment in a court, in any appropriate county of
this state, certified copies of the order and letters of office.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:19

 **464-C:19 Registration of Protective Orders. –** If a conservator
has been appointed in another state and a petition for a protective
order is not pending in this state, the conservator appointed in the
other state, after giving notice to the appointing court of an intent to
register, may register the protective order in this state by filing as a
foreign judgment in a court of this state, in any county in which
property belonging to the protected person is located, certified copies
of the order and letters of office and of any bond.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:20

 **464-C:20 Effect of Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Upon registration of a guardianship or protective order from
another state, the guardian or conservator may exercise in this state
all powers authorized in the order of appointment except as prohibited
under the laws of this state, including maintaining actions and
proceedings in this state and, if the guardian or conservator is not a
resident of this state, subject to any conditions imposed upon
nonresident parties.
                                             
 II. Upon registration of a protective order from another state, the
court may require the conservator to post an adequate surety bond to
insure the faithful performance of his or her duties. The conservator
shall account to the court for the proceeds from the sale of any of the
protected person's estate situated in this state. A certified copy of
the approved account shall be filed with the court in this state prior
to discharge of the conservator unless the court of this state
authorizes the filing of an affidavit, in lieu of the account, stating
that the assets of the protected person situated in this state have been
transferred to the estate of the protected person pending in the court
of the other state.
                                             
 III. A court of this state may grant any relief available under this
chapter and other law of this state to enforce a registered order.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Article 5
                                             
Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 464-C:21

 **464-C:21 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** In
applying and construing this uniform act, consideration shall be given
to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject
matter among states that enact it.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:22

 **464-C:22 Relation to Electronic Signatures in Global and National
Commerce Act. –** This chapter modifies, limits, and supersedes the
federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, 15
U.S.C. section 7001, et seq., but does not modify, limit, or supersede
section 101(c) of that Act, 15 U.S.C. section 7001(c), or authorize
electronic delivery of any of the notices described in section 103(b) of
that act, 15 U.S.C. section 7003(b).

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 464-C:23

 **464-C:23 Transitional Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter applies to guardianship and protective proceedings
begun on or after January 1, 2016.
                                             
 II. Articles 1, 3, and 4 and RSA 464-C:21 and RSA 464-C:22 apply to
proceedings begun before January 1, 2016, regardless of whether a
guardianship or protective order has been issued.

**Source.** 2015, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.
