---
title: 'CHAPTER 465 GUARDIANSHIP OF INCOMPETENT VETERANS, ETC.'
---

TITLE XLIV
                                             
GUARDIANS AND CONSERVATORS
==========================

CHAPTER 465
                                             
GUARDIANSHIP OF INCOMPETENT VETERANS, ETC.
------------------------------------------

### Section 465:1


                                             

This chapter was modeled after the original 1928 version of The Uniform
Veterans' Guardianship Act (1928) which was withdrawn from
recommendation for enactment by the National Conference of Commissioners
on Uniform State Laws in 1942 due to it being superseded by the revised
Uniform Veterans' Guardianship Act of 1942. New Hampshire has not
adopted the 1942 revision of The Uniform Veterans' Guardianship Act.

 **465:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 As used in this chapter the term "person'' includes a partnership,
corporation, or an association. The term "Department of Veterans
Affairs'' means the United States Department of Veterans Affairs or its
successor. The terms "estate'' and "income'' shall include only moneys
received by the guardian from the Department of Veterans Affairs and all
earnings, interest, and profits derived therefrom. The term "benefits''
shall mean all moneys payable by the United States through the
Department of Veterans Affairs. The term "secretary'' means the
secretary of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs or his
successor. The term "ward'' means a beneficiary of the Department of
Veterans Affairs. The term "guardian'' as used herein shall mean any
person acting as a fiduciary for a ward.

**Source.** 1929, 171:1. RL 344:1.

### Section 465:2

 **465:2 Appointment of Guardian. –** Whenever, pursuant to any law
of the United States or regulation of the Department of Veterans
Affairs, the secretary requires, prior to payment of benefits, that a
guardian be appointed for a ward, such appointment may be made in the
manner hereinafter provided.

**Source.** 1929, 171:2. RL 344:2.

### Section 465:3

 **465:3 Limitation. –** Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person to accept appointment as guardian of any ward if
such proposed guardian shall at that time be acting as guardian for 5
wards. In any case, upon presentation of a petition by an attorney of
the Department of Veterans Affairs under this section alleging that a
guardian is acting in a fiduciary capacity for more than 5 wards and
requesting his discharge for that reason, the court, upon proof
substantiating the petition, shall require a final accounting forthwith
from such guardian and shall discharge such guardian in said case. An
individual may be guardian of more than 5 wards if they are all members
of the same family. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the director of the state office of veterans services acting under an
appointment made pursuant to RSA 465:5.

**Source.** 1929, 171:3. RL 344:3. 1953, 113:1, eff. April 23, 1953.
2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 465:4

 **465:4 Petition. –** If there is no person entitled to petition for
the appointment of a guardian or if the person so entitled shall neglect
or refuse to file such a petition within 30 days after mailing of notice
by the Department of Veterans Affairs by registered mail to the last
known address of such person indicating the necessity for the same, a
petition for such appointment may be filed in the probate court by or on
behalf of any inhabitant of this state. The petition for appointment
shall set forth the name, age, place of residence of the ward, the names
and places of residence of the nearest relatives, if known, and the fact
that such ward is entitled to receive moneys payable by or through the
Department of Veterans Affairs and shall set forth the amount of moneys
then due and the amount of probable future payments. The petition shall
also set forth the name and address of the person or institution, if
any, having actual custody of the ward. In the case of a mentally
incompetent ward, the petition shall show that such ward has been rated
incompetent on examination by the Department of Veterans Affairs in
accordance with the laws and regulations governing the Department of
Veterans Affairs.

**Source.** 1929, 171:4. RL 344:4.

### Section 465:5

 **465:5 Of Guardianship for Veteran in Custody of a State
Institution. –** If a mentally incompetent veteran in a state
institution shall have no guardian, and if no petition for appointment
of a guardian shall be made as hereinbefore provided, the director of
the state office of veterans services may file a petition praying that
he or his successor in office, as and in the capacity of the director of
the state office of veterans services, may be appointed guardian of such
veteran. Such petition shall set forth the matters required by RSA
465:4.

**Source.** 1953, 113:2, eff. April 23, 1953. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31,
2010.

### Section 465:6

 **465:6 Certificate; Minor Wards. –** Where a petition is filed for
the appointment of a guardian of a minor ward, a certificate of the
director, or his representative, setting forth the age of such minor as
shown by the records of the Department of Veterans Affairs and the fact
that the appointment of a guardian is a condition precedent to the
payment of any moneys due the minor by the Department of Veterans
Affairs, shall be prima facie evidence of the necessity for such
appointment.

**Source.** 1929, 171:5. RL 344:5.

### Section 465:7

 **465:7 Incompetent Wards. –** Where a petition is filed for the
appointment of a guardian of a mentally incompetent ward, a certificate
of the director, or his representative, setting forth the fact that such
person has been rated incompetent by the Department of Veterans Affairs
on examination in accordance with the laws and regulations governing
such Department of Veterans Affairs and that the appointment of a
guardian is a condition precedent to the payment of any moneys due such
person by the Department of Veterans Affairs, shall be prima facie
evidence of the necessity for such appointment.

**Source.** 1929, 171:6. RL 344:6.

### Section 465:8

 **465:8 Bonds for Guardians. –** If the estate of the ward consists
of funds received from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs,
or earnings thereon, in excess of 
                                             $1,000, the guardian shall give bond
to the judge of probate in a reasonable sum, with corporate sureties,
upon condition, among other things, to return an inventory, to render,
upon oath, a true and just account of his guardianship, when thereto
required, and to faithfully discharge his trust.

**Source.** 1943, 96:1, eff. March 30, 1943.

### Section 465:9

 **465:9 Accounts. –** A true copy of each account filed with the
court shall be sent by the guardian to the office of the Department of
Veterans Affairs having jurisdiction over the area in which such court
is located; and notice of the filing thereof and of the return day
thereon shall be given forthwith by the court to said Department of
Veterans Affairs office.

**Source.** 1929, 171:7. RL 344:7.

### Section 465:10

 **465:10 Notice to Department of Veterans Affairs. –** In addition
to the notice required on the filing of accounts with the court, as
provided in RSA 465:9, notice shall be given to the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs on petitions for the appointment of
guardians, petitions for support, petitions for leave to expend funds,
petitions for license to purchase or sell real estate, and petitions for
the removal of guardianship appointments, in any case in which the ward
is entitled to any benefits payable by or through the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs.

**Source.** 1943, 96:2, eff. March 30, 1943.

### Section 465:11

 **465:11 Compensation. –** Compensation payable to guardians shall
not exceed 5 percent of the income of the ward during any year. In the
event of extraordinary services rendered by such guardian, the court
may, upon petition and after hearing thereon, authorize additional
compensation therefor payable from the estate of the ward. Notice of
such petition and hearing shall be given the proper office of the
Department of Veterans Affairs in the manner provided in RSA 465:9. No
compensation shall be allowed on the corpus of an estate received from a
preceding guardian. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the director of the state office of veterans services acting under an
appointment as guardian as herein provided. Said director shall not be
entitled to any compensation, in addition to his regular salary, for
acting as such guardian.

**Source.** 1921, 171:8. RL 344:8. 1953, 113:3, eff. April 23, 1953.
2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 465:12

 **465:12 Income; Application. –** A guardian shall not apply any
portion of the estate of his ward for the support and maintenance of any
person other than his ward, except spouse, minor child or children,
except upon order of the court after a hearing, notice of which has been
given the proper office of the Department of Veterans Affairs in the
manner provided in RSA 465:9.

**Source.** 1921, 171:9. RL 344:9. 1943, 96:3, eff. March 30, 1943.

### Section 465:13

 **465:13 Settlement of Accounts. –** A guardian may be required to
settle his account at any time on a petition filed by the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs.

**Source.** 1943, 96:4, eff. March 30, 1943.

### Section 465:14

 **465:14 Application of Other Laws. –** So far as applicable the
provisions of RSA 463 and 464-A shall apply to the guardians appointed
hereunder.

**Source.** 1929, 171:10. RL 344:10.
