---
title: CHAPTER 426 STANDARDS FOR FARM PRODUCTS
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 426
                                             
STANDARDS FOR FARM PRODUCTS
---------------------------

### Section 426:1

 **426:1 Official Grades and Standards. –** The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food, whenever, in the commissioner's opinion,
the public good so requires, may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
establishing official grades and standards for farm products which are
produced within the state for purposes of sale.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5. 1997, 104:1, eff. June 9, 1997.

### Section 426:2

 **426:2 Brands and Labels. –** When such grades and standards are so
established, the commissioner may determine the design of brands or
labels for identifying such farm products, may cause said brands or
labels to be printed and may authorize their use upon written
application and payment of reasonable compensation therefor. Whenever
upon investigation it shall appear that such brands or labels have been
misused, the commissioner may revoke or suspend said authorization.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 426:3

 **426:3 Publication. –** The establishment of such grades and
standards and the determination of the design for such brands or labels
shall not be effective until reasonable notice by publication has been
given. The commissioner may distribute information relative to such
grades, standards, brands and labels.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 426:4

 **426:4 Use of Brands and Labels Restricted. –** After the
establishment of grades and standards and the determination of the
design of the brands or labels as provided in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to use such brand or label to identify farm products as being
of an established grade or standard without authorization for its use,
or after the revocation of the right to use such brand or label by the
commissioner. For the purpose of further protecting the grades as
officially established by the commissioner, or any grades established
under an act of Congress by the United States Department of Agriculture
on the same products, it shall be unlawful to use the officially
designated grade words, titles, or names for the purpose of identifying,
advertising, designating, or describing any lots of such products unless
such designated grade words, titles, or names for the purpose of
identifying, advertising, designating, or describing any lots of such
products unless such products fully meet the requirements of the
official grade indicated. When, in the opinion of the commissioner or
the commissioner's representative, it is believed that any lot or lots
of such products so identified, advertised, designated, or described may
not be of the grade indicated, the commissioner shall cause inspections
of such products to be made for the purpose of determining the actual
grade.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1997, 104:2, eff. June 9, 1997.

### Section 426:5

 **426:5 Use of Words "Native,'' "Local,'' and "Our Own.''. –**
                                             
 I. No farm products sold, offered, or exposed for sale or
distribution in the state shall be advertised, labeled, or described as
"native'' unless they were grown or produced in the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 II. It shall be unlawful to advertise, label, or describe farm
products sold, offered, or exposed for sale or distribution in this
state in terms that are false, deceptive, or misleading as to the place
of origin of the farm products. The term "our own'' is deceptive when
used to describe farm products unless they were grown or produced by the
operator of the retail location. The terms "local,'' "locally grown,''
or "locally produced'' are deceptive when used to describe farm products
unless they were grown or produced within the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1997, 104:3, eff. June 9, 1997.

### Section 426:6

 **426:6 Definition. –** In this chapter, "organic'' means an
agricultural plant, animal, food, or fiber commodity produced in
accordance with the Organic Foods Production Act of 1990, Public Law
101-624, and the United States Department of Agriculture's National
Organic Program, Final Rule, 7 CFR part 205.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1986, 20:1, eff. June 17, 1986. 2002, 38:1, eff.
April 19, 2002.

### Section 426:6-a

 **426:6-a Labeling and Advertising. –** An agricultural plant,
animal, food, or fiber commodity shall not be sold or labeled as organic
unless it meets the requirements set forth in the Organic Foods
Production Act of 1990, Public Law 101-624, and the United States
Department of Agriculture's National Organic Program, Final Rule, 7 CFR
part 205.

**Source.** 1986, 20:1, eff. June 17, 1986. 2002, 38:2, eff. April 19,
2002.

### Section 426:6-b

 **426:6-b Certification. –**
                                             
 I. Any producer, processor, on-farm processor or handler of
agricultural plant, animal, food, or fiber commodities that are sold,
labeled, or represented as "100 percent organic,'' "organic,'' "made
with organic,'' or similar terms, shall be enrolled in a certification
program which includes an inspection made no less than annually, by a
certifying agency accredited by the United States Department of
Agriculture in accordance with the Organic Foods Production Act of 1990,
Public Law 101-624, and the United States Department of Agriculture's
National Organic Program, Final Rule, 7 CFR part 205, unless such
producer, processor, or handler is exempted therein.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may enter into a cooperative agreement with the
United States Department of Agriculture to become an accredited
certifying agency as provided for by the Organic Foods Production Act of
1990, Public Law 101-624, and the United States Department of
Agriculture's National Organic Program, Final Rule, 7 CFR part 205, and
to implement the provisions thereof.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may employ inspectors to certify agricultural
producers, processors, on-farm processors and handlers in this state,
and to determine whether or not agricultural plant, animal, food, or
fiber commodities are marked, branded, or labeled in accordance with the
labeling requirements set forth in this chapter and in the Organic Foods
Production Act of 1990, Public Law 101-624, and the United States
Department of Agriculture's National Organic Program, Final Rule, 7 CFR
part 205.
                                             
 IV, V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. For purposes of this chapter "on-farm processor'' means a
processor who uses products grown or raised on his or her own farm.

**Source.** 1986, 20:1, eff. June 17, 1986. 2002, 38:3, eff. April 19,
2002. 2003, 177:1, 2, eff. Aug. 22, 2003; 177:5, 7, eff. July 1, 2007.
2013, 136:3, eff. June 27, 2013.

### Section 426:7

 **426:7 Inspections. –** The commissioner may employ inspectors to
inspect farm products, marked, branded or labeled in accordance with
official grades or standards so established, for the purpose of
determining and certifying the quality and condition thereof and other
material facts relative thereto. Upon such investigation, the inspector
may issue a certificate which shall state the date and place of
inspection, the grade, condition and quality of the farm products
inspected and such other facts as the commissioner may require. Such a
certificate and all federal certificates relative to the condition or
quality of said farm products shall be prima facie evidence in all
courts of the state of the facts set forth in such certificates.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 426:7-a

 **426:7-a Stop Sale, Use or Removal Orders. –** When the
commissioner or the commissioner's authorized agent has reasonable cause
to believe farm products advertised as "native,'' "local,'' "locally
grown,'' "our own,'' or "locally produced'' are being distributed in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any of the
rules adopted under this chapter, the commissioner or agent may issue
and serve a written "stop sale, use or removal'' order upon the owner or
custodian of any such farm products. The farm products shall not be
sold, used or removed until the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with and the farm products have been released by the
commissioner or the violation has been otherwise disposed of as provided
in this chapter by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1985, 34:3. 1997, 104:4, eff. June 9, 1997.

### Section 426:8

 **426:8 Rulemaking; Fees. –** The commissioner may adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, for carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 38:4, eff. April 19,
2002. 2003, 177:3, eff. Aug. 22, 2003; 177:6, eff. July 1, 2007. 2013,
136:4, eff. June 27, 2013.

### Section 426:8-a

 **426:8-a Organic Processors and Handlers; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. Each applicant under RSA 426:6-b shall pay a certification fee as
follows:
                                             
 (a) Processors and handlers which are not on-farm processors
shall pay:
                                             
 (1) A 
                                             $250 fee for the primary facility; and
                                             
 (2) A 
                                             $100 fee for each additional processing or handling
facility.
                                             
 (b) On-farm processors shall pay a 
                                             $50 fee.
                                             
 II. Each applicant for organic processor, handler, or on-farm
processor certification shall pay an inspection fee calculated by the
department as follows:
                                             
 (a) A rate of 
                                             $35 per hour of inspection time, including travel
time, by the department's inspectors; and
                                             
 (b) Travel expenses to and from the applicant's facility at a
rate of 
                                             $0. 55 per mile.
                                             
 (c) The inspection fee shall be calculated after the inspection
visit is completed and a subsequent inspection report has been filed
with the department.
                                             
 (d) The inspection fee shall be payable within 30 days of the
billing date.
                                             
 III. Such fees shall be credited to the general fund of the state.

**Source.** 2013, 136:5, eff. June 27, 2013.

### Section 426:9

 **426:9 Free Access. –** The commissioner, deputy commissioner,
inspectors, or authorized assistants shall have free access at all
reasonable times to any building or other place where farm products to
which this chapter applies are believed to be held for purposes of sale,
and may open any bags, crates, or other containers found therein and
examine their contents, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter. Samples may be removed therefrom by tendering to the
holder thereof the market price for the samples.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 426:10

 **426:10 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, personally or by a servant or agent, violates any
provision of this chapter or rule adopted under this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if
any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any
rule adopted or order issued under this chapter shall, in addition, be
liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each violation,
for each day of a continuing violation, which may be collected in a
civil action or in connection with an action for injunctive relief
brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any
rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the imposition of
an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:1. 1997, 104:5, eff. June 9, 1997.
