---
title: CHAPTER 428 POULTRY AND POULTRY PRODUCTS
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 428
                                             
POULTRY AND POULTRY PRODUCTS
----------------------------

Poultry Inspection
------------------

### Section 428:1

 **428:1 Applicability of Other Provisions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011,
130:11, IV, eff. Aug. 5, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 428:2

 **428:2 Definitions. –** As much as possible, all of the definitions
in regard to procedures and rules for the buying, selling and handling
of meat products, as provided under RSA 427:2, shall apply to the
buying, selling and handling of poultry products under this subdivision.
In addition, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. The term "Federal Poultry Products Inspection Act'' means the act
so entitled, approved August 28, 1957 (71 Stat. 441), as amended by the
Wholesome Poultry Products Act (82 Stat. 791).
                                             
 II. The term "container'' or "package'' includes any box, can, tin,
cloth, plastic, or other receptacle, wrapper, or cover.
                                             
 III. The term "poultry'' means any domesticated bird, whether alive
or dead.
                                             
 IV. The term "shipping container'' means any container used or
intended for use in packaging the product packed in an immediate
container.
                                             
 V. The term "immediate container'' includes any consumer package, or
any other container in which poultry products, not consumer packaged,
are packed.
                                             
 VI. The term "official establishment'' means any establishment, as
determined by the commissioner, at which inspection of slaughter of
poultry or the processing of poultry products is maintained under the
authority of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:3

 **428:3 Federal-State Cooperation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 130:11, V,
eff. Aug. 5, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 428:4

 **428:4 Intrastate Commercial Control. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 130:11,
VI, eff. Aug. 5, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 428:5

 **428:5 Exemptions and Exceptions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 130:11, VII,
eff. Aug. 5, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 428:6

 **428:6 Entry of Materials into Official Establishment. –** The
state veterinarian may limit the entry of poultry products and other
materials into any official establishment, under such conditions as he
may prescribe to assure that allowing the entry of such articles into
such inspected establishments will be consistent with the purposes of
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:7

 **428:7 Application of Federal Poultry Products Inspection Act. –**
The requirements of this subdivision shall apply to persons,
establishments, poultry, poultry products and other articles regulated
under the Federal Poultry Products Inspection Act only to the extent
provided for in section 23 of said federal act.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:8

 **428:8 Costs of Inspection; Limitation. –** The cost of inspection
rendered under the requirements of this subdivision shall be borne by
the state, except that the cost of overtime and holiday work performed
in establishments subject to the provisions of this subdivision shall be
at such rates as the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may
determine, and shall be borne by such establishments. Such costs shall
be collected by the commissioner. All employees of the department who
are required to make inspections at any time after working 40 hours per
week or after working 8 hours per day shall be paid at the rate of time
and a half. Labor performed on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall
also be compensated at the rate of time and a half. Costs collected by
the commissioner for such premium pay work shall be available without
fiscal year limitation to carry out the purposes of this section.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995. 2003, 202:2,
eff. July 1, 2003.

Purchase and Sale of Poultry
----------------------------

### Section 428:9

 **428:9 License Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall engage in the business of buying live poultry in
this state, the meat or meat product of which is to be sold or used for
food, from the owner thereof, as defined in this section, unless he has
a license from the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food.
Licenses shall be issued in 2 forms:
                                             
 (a) An unlimited license to each person who shall furnish a bond
with sufficient surety in an amount to be determined by the commissioner
of agriculture, but not to exceed 
                                             $50,000, payable to the state of New
Hampshire and conditioned on the faithful performance of all legal
obligations incurred in the buying and selling of live poultry, the meat
or meat product of which is to be sold or used for food; such bond shall
be held by the commissioner to satisfy any court judgment obtained or
execution issued against any licensee because of failure to perform such
legal obligation; and
                                             
 (b) A limited license which shall permit the licensee to do
business on a United States currency, certified check, cashier's check
or traveler's check basis only. Applications for licenses herein
provided shall be made in such manner and upon such forms as the
commissioner of agriculture shall prescribe.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, "owner'' is defined as any person
having title to live poultry during the periods of time in which such
poultry is being grown to marketable size or being kept for egg
production.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:10

 **428:10 Suspension and Revocation. –** Whenever the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food has reasonable grounds to believe that a
licensee has violated any of the provisions of this subdivision or any
rule adopted hereunder, he may suspend the license of such licensee
forthwith for a period not to exceed 30 days. Upon such suspension the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food shall notify the licensee
thereof and the grounds therefor, and shall set a time and place for
hearing. If upon hearing it shall appear that such provisions or rules
have been violated, said license shall be revoked; otherwise it shall be
reinstated.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:11

 **428:11 Expiration. –** All licenses issued hereunder shall expire
on March 31 of each year.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:12

 **428:12 Identification. –** The commissioner shall furnish to each
licensee a permit for transportation of live poultry for each vehicle
used for transporting live poultry in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:13

 **428:13 Transportation. –** No licensee shall transport live
poultry for food purposes without a permit from the department of
agriculture, markets, and food which shall designate the vehicle used
for such transportation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:14

 **428:14 Additional Vehicles. –** Whenever any licensee shall
acquire additional, or shall exchange, vehicles used in such
transportation, he shall report the facts to the commissioner and pay
the necessary fee.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:15

 **428:15 Carrying Permit. –** Every person operating a vehicle used
in the business of buying or selling live poultry shall have the permit
to engage in such business, or a certified copy thereof, in said vehicle
in some easily accessible place.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:16

 **428:16 Weighing. –** Before any license or renewal thereof is
issued under this subdivision, the applicant shall file with the
commissioner a certificate from an inspector of weights and measures to
the effect that the weights to be used in the business for buying and
selling live poultry have been inspected and have been found correct or
furnish the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food with a
declaration to the effect that all poultry purchased by him will be
weighed on scales properly sealed by the department.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:17

 **428:17 Fees. –** The fee for each license issued under this
subdivision shall be 
                                             $20. The price for each permit shall be 
                                             $15. The
fees for transfer shall be 
                                             $5.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:18

 **428:18 Bill of Sale Required. –** No person shall transport live
poultry which he has obtained from another from place to place along any
public highway unless he has in his possession a bill of sale or other
memorandum signed by the vendor, owner, or agent of the same, and
containing the address of such vendor or owner, the date of sale or
other transaction involving the transfer of possession, the breed,
weight, price, and approximate number of live poultry obtained.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:19

 **428:19 Rules; Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food shall have
general authority to administer this chapter and shall adopt such rules
pursuant to RSA 541-A as are necessary to carry out its provisions.
                                             
 II. Administration of the licensing process required by this chapter
shall be the responsibility of the division of animal industry within
the department of agriculture, markets, and food as established by RSA
436:2.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:4, 5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:20

 **428:20 Penalty. –** Any person violating the provisions of this
subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who buys live
poultry, except from a person licensed under this subdivision or from a
person who raised such live poultry or his agent, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor for each offense.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:21

 **428:21 Disposal of License Fees and Penalties. –** The
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food shall pay into the state
treasury monthly all moneys received under the provisions of this
subdivision. The state treasurer shall hold all moneys so received in a
separate fund and shall pay out the same upon warrant of the governor
and upon order of the commissioner for the purpose of paying the
expenses of the administration of the subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

Sale of Eggs
------------

### Section 428:22

 **428:22 Definitions. –** Terms used in this subdivision shall be
construed as follows unless a different meaning is clearly apparent from
the language or context:
                                             
 I. "Person'' means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or
association.
                                             
 II. "Retail'' means selling direct to a consumer.
                                             
 III. "Candling'' means the common practice of examining the interior
of an egg by holding and twirling the same before a bright light passing
through an aperture in an opaque shield.
                                             
 IV. "Eggs'' shall mean hens' eggs.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:23

 **428:23 Sale as Fresh. –** No person shall sell, offer, expose or
advertise for sale, or exchange or distribute eggs as fresh eggs,
strictly fresh eggs, native eggs, hennery eggs, nearby eggs, or new laid
eggs, or under other words or descriptions of similar import, any eggs
which are not fresh as defined in RSA 428:24.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:24

 **428:24 "Fresh'' Defined. –** No egg shall be deemed to be fresh
which does not meet standards of New Hampshire extra grade for eggs, as
established by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food under
RSA 426:1, or modifications or amendments to said standards, the final
determination of which shall be by candling.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:25

 **428:25 Marking. –** All fresh eggs for human consumption sold,
offered, exposed or advertised for sale at retail, or wholesale, or
exchanged or distributed at retail, or wholesale, within the state shall
be plainly and conspicuously marked and identified with the word
"fresh.''

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 428:26

 **428:26 Size to be Marked. –** The size of all eggs for human
consumption which are sold, offered, exposed, or advertised for sale at
retail, or wholesale, or exchanged or distributed at retail, or
wholesale, within the state in bulk, or in open or closed packages or
containers, shall be plainly and conspicuously marked and identified by
such terms as the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may
from time to time by rule prescribe.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:27

 **428:27 Rulemaking; Assistants. –** The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food shall have general authority to
administer this subdivision and shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, for carrying out its provisions. He may appoint agents to assist
him and fix their salaries within the amount appropriated therefor,
subject to the rules of the state personnel commission. He shall in
person or by his deputy or agent have free access at all reasonable
hours to any place, building, or vehicle in which eggs are sold,
offered, or exposed for sale, or exchanged or distributed at retail, or
wholesale. He shall also have power in person or by his deputy or agent
to open any package or container, and may upon tendering the market
price take such container and its contents or sample therefrom.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:28

 **428:28 Hearings. –** When the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food learns of any violation of any of the provisions of
this subdivision, he shall cause notice of such violations, together
with the copy of his findings, to be given the person or persons
concerned. Persons so notified shall be afforded a hearing under rules
adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:2. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 428:29

 **428:29 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, violates
any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 428:29-a

 **428:29-a Stop Sale, Use or Removal Orders. –** When the
commissioner or his authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe
eggs are being distributed in violation of any of the provisions of this
subdivision, or of any rules adopted under this subdivision, he may
issue and serve a written "stop sale, use or removal'' order upon the
owner or custodian of any such eggs. The eggs shall not be sold, used or
removed until the provisions of this subdivision have been complied with
and the eggs have been released by the commissioner or the violation has
been otherwise disposed of as provided in this subdivision by a court of
competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1985, 34:4, eff. June 8, 1985.

### Section 428:30

 **428:30 Interpretation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 114:6, I, eff. July 1,
2012.
                                             ]
