---
title: CHAPTER 429 BEEKEEPING AND MAPLE AND HONEY PRODUCTS
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 429
                                             
BEEKEEPING AND MAPLE AND HONEY PRODUCTS
---------------------------------------

Beekeeping
----------

### Section 429:1

 **429:1 Inspector. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food shall appoint some person, qualified by experience and knowledge in
beekeeping, as inspector of apiaries. Said inspector shall be
responsible to the commissioner for the performance of his duties under
this subdivision and may be removed at any time on neglect of the duties
of his office. The commissioner may appoint from time to time additional
duly qualified apiary inspectors as may be needed.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:2

 **429:2 Inspection. –** The inspector shall, annually, make such
inspection of the apiaries throughout the state as may be deemed
necessary to determine the presence of any bee diseases of a contagious
or infectious nature and take such action as may be necessary to
suppress the same.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:3

 **429:3 Right of Entry; Authority of Inspector. –** The inspector
shall have free access at all reasonable hours to all apiaries or other
premises where bees, bee products, supplies or appliances used in
apiaries are kept, and may make such examination of the bees, bee
products, supplies or appliances as may be necessary to ascertain the
existence of any contagious or infectious disease harmful to bees in the
egg, larval, pupal or adult state. If, by reason of such examination,
the inspector is satisfied of the existence of any such disease or
diseases, he shall order the owner to eradicate same within 10 days
after a date specified in writing by the inspector, or he may with the
consent and cooperation of the owner proceed immediately to eradicate
same by the methods prescribed by the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:4

 **429:4 Moveable Frame Hives Required. –** It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to keep or maintain honey bees in any
hives other than modern, moveable, frame hives which permit the thorough
examination of every comb in order to detect the presence of bee
diseases.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:5

 **429:5 Penalty. –** Whoever violates or fails to comply with any
provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:6

 **429:6 Report. –** The inspector shall render annually on or before
July 1 a full and complete report of his work. This report shall be
included in and made a part of the report of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:7

 **429:7 Certifying Imports. –** No bees, or used bee supplies or
equipment, shall be shipped or moved into the state without a
certificate signed by a legally authorized inspector that they are free
from any infectious or contagious disease. Bees and queen in mailing
cages shall be considered as a colony for the purposes of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:8

 **429:8 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food shall adopt rules, after a public hearing and pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Standards for inspection of apiaries.
                                             
 II. Establishing fees for inspection of apiaries.
                                             
 III. Measures necessary for the control, eradication, prevention of
the introduction, spread, or dissemination of any and all bee diseases.
                                             
 IV. Certifying imports of bees, and bee supplies or equipment.
                                             
 V. Control of American foulbrood disease of honeybees.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1987, 132:2. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:9

 **429:9 Spraying Trees; When Prohibited. –** It shall be unlawful to
use any poisonous material in the form of spray or dust upon fruit
trees, shade trees, or shrubs that are in blossom; provided that such
poisonous material may be used prior to the opening of the blossoms and
after the petals have fallen from 90 percent of the blossoms; and
provided further that the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food
may permit the use of specific materials for fruit blossom thinning
sprays after consultation with the research staff of the New Hampshire
agricultural experiment station. The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food shall cause to be published annually in April in the
Weekly Market Bulletin a list of approved blossom thinning materials.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:10

 **429:10 Penalty. –** Whoever violates the provisions of RSA 429:9
shall be guilty of a violation for each offense.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:11

 **429:11 Control of Disease. –** The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food and the state entomologist are authorized to develop a
program for the control of American foulbrood disease of honeybees
through the fumigation of hives and such other measures as will control
such disease. They shall establish reasonable fees for providing disease
control services to owners of bees in this state and in adjoining
states. The fees established under this section shall be sufficient to
pay, over a 5-year period, for any equipment purchased to provide such
services and to pay for the maintenance and operation expenses of such
equipment.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:11-a

 **429:11-a Authorization to Destroy. –** In control or eradication
of dangerous bee diseases, the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food or his authorized representatives may destroy by burning or
otherwise any infected bees, hives, honey, or appliances that he or they
may deem necessary for such control or eradication, without remuneration
to the owner. Such infected bees, hives, honey, and appliances shall be
deemed a public nuisance.

**Source.** 1987, 132:3. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:11-b

 **429:11-b Appeals. –** Appeals from any decision by the
commissioner under this subdivision shall be governed by RSA 541.

**Source.** 1987, 132:3, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 429:12

 **429:12 Acceptance of Grants. –** The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food is authorized to accept any gifts, grants or donations
from any source for the purpose of controlling American foulbrood
disease of honeybees and for the purpose of research and control of all
bee diseases.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

Maple and Honey Products
------------------------

### Section 429:13

 **429:13 Definitions. –** When used in this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Advertisement'' means any method used to call attention to a
product which is intended to arouse a desire to purchase that product.
It shall include, but is not limited to, signs, displays, radio and
television broadcasts, newspapers and periodicals, direct mail, and
other printed forms.
                                             
 II. "Bulk honey'' means honey packed in containers of more than one
gallon; or more than 12 pounds.
                                             
 III. "Bulk maple syrup'' means maple syrup packed in containers of
more than one gallon.
                                             
 III-a. "Commercial sugarmaker'' means a person who collects or
purchases maple sap for maple production and sale.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner for the New Hampshire
department of agriculture, markets, and food or his designee.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the New Hampshire department of agriculture,
markets, and food.
                                             
 VI. "Grade'' or "grades'' means the standards for maple syrup or
honey:
                                             
 (a) Established by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food as the official grades for maple syrup or honey produced in the
state of New Hampshire as provided in RSA 426:1;
                                             
 (b) Established by the United States Department of Agriculture;
or
                                             
 (c) Established by the laws of some other state if the maple
syrup or honey was produced in whole or in part in such other state.
                                             
 VII. "Honey'', "liquid or extracted honey'', "strained honey'' or
"pure honey'' means the nectar of plants that has been transformed by
and is the natural product of the honeybee, either in the honeycomb, or
taken from the honeycomb and marketed in a liquid, crystallized or
granulated condition.
                                             
 VII-a. "Honey products'' means only honey, liquid or extracted
honey, strained honey, pure honey, comb honey, chunk honey, cremed
honey, or any other product in which the sugar content is entirely
derived from pure honey and to which nothing has been added.
                                             
 VII-b. "Maple packer'' means a person who purchases and packs or
further processes maple syrup for sale.
                                             
 VIII. "Maple products'' means only maple syrup, maple sugar, maple
cream, or any other product in which the sugar content is entirely
derived from pure maple sap and to which nothing has been added.
                                             
 IX. "Maple sap'' means the unprocessed liquid derived from the maple
tree (Acer).
                                             
 X. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XI. "Maple sugar'' means the solid, crystalline product of maple
tree sap only.
                                             
 XII. "Maple syrup'' means syrup made from pure maple sap and
intended for human consumption or for use in the manufacture of maple
products.
                                             
 XIII. "Packaged honey'' means honey packed in containers of one
gallon or less; or 12 pounds or less.
                                             
 XIV. "Packaged maple syrup'' means maple syrup packed in containers
of one gallon or less.
                                             
 XV. "Person'' means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, cooperative or business trust.
                                             
 XVI. "Produced in New Hampshire'' means only that maple syrup or
honey or those other maple or honey products which are manufactured in
their entirety from pure, unprocessed maple sap or from pure unprocessed
honey, as applicable, within the state of New Hampshire pursuant to
standards established by this subdivision and the rules adopted
hereunder.
                                             
 XVII. "Public eating place'' means any person or establishment
engaged in the business of preparing and selling food for the general
public's consumption on the premises.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:4, 5. 1997, 136:3, I. 2000, 68:1, 2.
2001, 5:1, 2, eff. June 22, 2001.

### Section 429:13-a

 **429:13-a Registration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall design and implement a voluntary
registration program for persons who produce or pack maple sap or maple
products for sale.
                                             
 II. A commercial sugarmaker or maple packer who agrees to
voluntarily register for a period of 6 years shall complete a
registration form supplied by the commissioner. The information on the
form shall be limited to the name of the owner or operator, the farm or
business name, the address and phone number of the farm or business, and
whether the registrant is a commercial sugarmaker or maple packer.
                                             
 III. Commercial sugarmakers and maple packers agreeing to
voluntarily register shall be placed on a list of voluntary registrants
by the commissioner. Use of the voluntary registration list by the
department shall be limited to disseminating information relative to the
maple industry, conducting surveys on topics that are timely and
important to the maple industry, and emergency notification to
commercial sugarmakers and maple packers of conditions or practices
found to adversely impact the quality of maple products.

**Source.** 2000, 68:3, eff. June 20, 2000.

### Section 429:14

 **429:14 Labels. –**
                                             
 I. Every shipment, package or container of maple syrup packed, sold,
offered or exposed for sale or distribution by any person shall be
plainly marked according to packaging and labeling rules and shall
include:
                                             
 (a) The name, address, and zip code of the packer, distributor,
or producer;
                                             
 (b) The true name of the product;
                                             
 (c) The grade; and
                                             
 (d) The volume of the contents at 68 degrees Fahrenheit or 20
degrees Celsius.
                                             
 II. Every shipment, package or container of maple products other
than maple syrup, packed, sold, offered or exposed for sale or
distribution by any person shall be plainly marked according to
packaging and labeling rules and shall include:
                                             
 (a) The name, address and zip code of the packer;
                                             
 (b) The true name of the product;
                                             
 (c) The volume of the contents at 68 degrees Fahrenheit or 20
degrees Celsius if the product is a liquid or with the net weight if the
product is not a liquid.
                                             
 III. Any labeling on bulk or packaged maple syrup which indicates
"state of New Hampshire pure maple syrup'', "New Hampshire maple
syrup,'' "New Hampshire syrup,'' or any other words which imply that the
syrup so marked was produced in New Hampshire shall be used exclusively
upon maple syrup which is entirely produced within the state of New
Hampshire in compliance with the terms of this subdivision and the rules
adopted hereunder.
                                             
 IV. Any labeling on all other maple products which states or implies
that those products were produced in New Hampshire shall be used
exclusively upon pure maple products which are entirely produced within
the state of New Hampshire in compliance with the terms of this
subdivision and the rules adopted hereunder.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 2000, 68:4, eff. June 20, 2000.

### Section 429:15

 **429:15 Adulteration; Filtration. –**
                                             
 I. Maple products which are labeled as being pure maple products and
which are produced, packaged, handled or sold in this state shall not in
any way be adulterated with cane sugar, corn sugar, or any other foreign
sweetener.
                                             
 II. Maple syrup which is produced, packaged, handled or sold in this
state shall not be bleached or lightened in color by artificial means
except by simple filtration through cloth or paper to remove suspended
solids. The commissioner may by rule approve other methods of
filtration.
                                             
 III. Maple syrup and maple products which are labeled as being pure
maple products and which are produced, packaged, handled, or sold in
this state shall not in any way be adulterated by the addition or
introduction of any substance that would change the essential
characteristics of the maple product or render the maple products
unsafe.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 2000, 68:5, eff. June 20, 2000.

### Section 429:16

 **429:16 Labeling Container of Maple Flavored Products. –**
                                             
 I. Every product or package containing a product made by combining
maple sap, maple sugar or maple syrup with any other sugar or other
substance packed, sold, offered or exposed for sale or distribution by
any person in this state shall be plainly marked according to packaging
and labeling rules and shall include the following on the principal
display panel:
                                             
 (a) An accurate and descriptive name;
                                             
 (b) The net quantity contents declaration; and
                                             
 (c) The amount of maple sugar or maple syrup the product contains
expressed in percentage of volume if the product is a liquid or a list
of the product ingredients in order of decreasing predominance by weight
if the product is a solid. The percentage statement or ingredient list
shall be in close proximity to the product name.
                                             
 II. The same information required in paragraph I shall be included
in any advertisements of the product. When the product is served in any
public eating place, the menu shall be conspicuously marked with an
accurate and descriptive name and a statement expressing the percentage
of maple sugar or maple syrup the product contains.
                                             
 III. The words "maple'', "mapyl'', "mapley'', or words of similar
import, shall not appear in any manner on a container, label, menu, or
advertisement of maple flavored products, unless:
                                             
 (a) Such words are printed in the statement of contents together
with the percentage;
                                             
 (b) Such words are a part of the packer's name, provided that the
packer's name cannot appear to be a part of the product name; or
                                             
 (c) The words "blend'' or "flavored'' appear immediately before,
after, above or below and in equal prominence and in letters of equal
size to such words.
                                             
 IV. The term "maple flavored'' may only be used when 100 percent of
the flavoring material is a pure maple product. If any artificial maple
flavor is used, the label shall clearly and conspicuously state
"artificial flavor''.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:17

 **429:17 Labeling Container of Artificial Maple Flavored Products.
–** It shall be unlawful to use the term "maple syrup'' or "maple
sugar'', however modified, to describe any product, flavoring, sweetener
or food additive unless the product, flavoring, sweetener or food
additive so described meets the statutory definition of "maple syrup''
or "maple sugar''. Terms such as "artificial maple syrup'' or
"artificial maple sugar'' are declared to be misleading and deceptive
and may not be used in the labeling or advertising of any product. Terms
such as "artificial maple flavor'' or "artificial maple flavor
sweetener'' may be used to describe a product flavored or sweetened with
a substance which attempts to duplicate real maple flavor, providing
that words such as "artificial'', "flavor'', and other modifiers of the
word "maple'' shall appear in equal prominence to the word "maple'' on
the label and in all advertising of the product.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:18

 **429:18 Hydrometers. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 136:3, II, eff. June 9,
1997.
                                             ]

### Section 429:19

 **429:19 Advertising. –**
                                             
 I. All advertisements of maple syrup displayed, circulated,
broadcast by radio or telecast within this state which quote a price
shall specify the grade and volume of maple syrup in equal prominence
with the stated price.
                                             
 II. All advertisements of maple products and maple flavored products
displayed, circulated, broadcast by radio or telecast within this state
which quote a price shall specify the quantity of contents in equal
prominence with the stated price.
                                             
 III. All advertisements of maple syrup or maple products which state
or imply that the products were produced in New Hampshire shall be used
exclusively upon maple syrup or maple products produced within the state
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. All advertising of maple flavored products shall be in
compliance with the advertising provisions contained in RSA 429:16. All
advertising of artificial maple flavored products shall be in compliance
with the advertising provisions contained in RSA 429:17.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:20

 **429:20 Labels. –**
                                             
 I. Every shipment, package or container of honey packed, sold,
offered or exposed for sale or distribution by any person shall be
plainly marked for packaging and labeling, and shall include:
                                             
 (a) The name, address and zip code of the packer, distributor, or
producer;
                                             
 (b) The true name of the product;
                                             
 (c) The grade, or the term " not graded''; and
                                             
 (d) The volume of the contents at 68 degrees Fahrenheit or 20
degrees Celsius or the net weight of the contents.
                                             
 II. Any labeling on bulk or packaged honey which indicates "state of
New Hampshire pure honey'', "New Hampshire honey'', or any other words
which imply that the honey so marked was produced in New Hampshire shall
be used exclusively upon honey which is entirely produced within the
state of New Hampshire in compliance with the terms of this subdivision
and the rules adopted hereunder.
                                             
 III. Any labeling on all other honey products which states or
implies that those products were produced in New Hampshire shall be used
exclusively upon pure honey products which are entirely produced within
the state of New Hampshire in compliance with the terms of this
subdivision and the rules adopted hereunder.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 2001, 5:3, eff. June 22, 2001.

### Section 429:21

 **429:21 Adulteration; Filtration. –**
                                             
 I. Honey which is labeled as being pure honey and which is produced,
packaged, handled or sold in this state shall not in any way be
adulterated with cane sugar, corn sugar, or any other foreign
sweetener.
                                             
 II. Honey which is produced, packaged, handled or sold in this state
shall not be bleached or lightened in color by artificial means except
by simple filtration through cloth or paper to remove suspended solids.
The commissioner may by rule approve other methods of filtration.
                                             
 III. Honey and honey products which are labeled as being pure honey
products and which are produced, packaged, handled, or sold in this
state shall not in any way be adulterated by the addition or
introduction of any substance that would change the essential
characteristics of the honey product or render the honey products
unsafe.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 2001, 5:4, eff. June 22, 2001.

### Section 429:22

 **429:22 Labeling Container of Honey Flavored Products. –**
                                             
 I. Every product or package containing a product made by combining
honey with any other sugar or other substance packed, sold, offered or
exposed for sale or distribution by any person in this state shall be
plainly marked for packaging and labeling rules and shall include the
following on the principal display panel:
                                             
 (a) An accurate and descriptive name;
                                             
 (b) The net quantity contents declaration; and
                                             
 (c) The amount of honey the product contains expressed in
percentage of volume. The percentage statement or ingredient list shall
be in close proximity to the product name.
                                             
 II. The same information required in paragraph I shall be included
in any advertisements of the product. When the product is served in any
public eating place, the menu shall be conspicuously marked with an
accurate and descriptive name and a statement expressing the percentage
of honey the product contains.
                                             
 III. The term "honey flavored'' may only be used when 100 percent of
the flavoring material is pure honey. If any artificial honey flavor is
used, the label shall clearly and conspicuously state "artificial
flavor''.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:23

 **429:23 Labeling Container of Artificial Honey Flavored Products.
–** It shall be unlawful to use the term "honey'', however modified, to
describe any product, flavoring, sweetener or food additive unless the
product, flavoring, sweetener or food additive so described meets the
statutory definition of "honey''. Terms such as "artificial honey'' are
declared to be misleading and deceptive and may not be used in the
labeling or advertising of any product. Terms such as "artificial honey
flavor'' or "artificial honey flavor sweetener'' may be used to describe
a product flavored or sweetened with a substance which attempts to
duplicate real honey flavor, providing that words such as "artificial'',
"flavor'', and other modifiers of the word "honey'' shall appear in
equal prominence and in letters of equal size to the word "honey'' on
the label and in all advertising of the product.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:24

 **429:24 Advertising. –**
                                             
 I. All advertisements of honey displayed, circulated, broadcast by
radio or telecast within this state which quote a price shall specify
the grade and volume of honey in equal prominence with the stated
price.
                                             
 II. All advertisements of honey and honey flavored products
displayed, circulated, broadcast by radio or telecast within this state
which quote a price shall specify the quantity of contents in equal
prominence with the stated price.
                                             
 III. All advertisements of honey which state or imply that the
products were produced in New Hampshire shall be used exclusively upon
honey produced within the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. All advertising of honey flavored products shall be in
compliance with the advertising provisions contained in RSA 429:22. All
advertising of artificial honey flavored products shall be in compliance
with the advertising provisions contained in RSA 429:23.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 429:25

 **429:25 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food shall have general authority to administer this
chapter and shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A for carrying out its
provisions. He shall in person or by his deputy or agent have free
access at all reasonable hours to any place, building, or vehicle in
which maple syrup or honey is sold, offered, or exposed for sale, or
exchanged or distributed at retail or wholesale. He shall also have
power in person or by his deputy or agent to open any package or
container, and may upon tendering the market price take such container
and its contents or sample therefrom.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:25-a

 **429:25-a Stop Sale, Use, or Removal Orders. –** When the
commissioner or duly authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe
any product is being distributed in violation of any of the provisions
of this subdivision, or any of the rules adopted under this subdivision,
the commissioner or duly authorized agent may issue and serve a written
"stop sale, use, or removal'' order upon the custodian of any such
product. The product shall not be sold, used, or removed until the
provisions of this subdivision have been complied with and the product
has been released by the commissioner or duly authorized agent or the
violation has been otherwise disposed of as provided in this subdivision
by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1997, 136:2, eff. June 9, 1997.

### Section 429:26

 **429:26 Hearings. –** When the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food learns of any violation of any of the provisions of
this subdivision, he shall cause notice of such violations, together
with the copy of his findings, to be given the person or persons
concerned. Persons so notified shall be afforded a hearing under rules
adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:4. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 429:27

 **429:27 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, violates
any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 429:28

 **429:28 Interpretation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 114:6, II, eff. July
1, 2012.
                                             ]
