---
title: CHAPTER 431 SOIL CONDITIONERS
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 431
                                             
SOIL CONDITIONERS
-----------------

Fertilizers
-----------

### Section 431:1

 **431:1 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known as the New
Hampshire Fertilizer Law.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:2

 **431:2 Administration. –** This subdivision shall be administered
by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5; 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:3

 **431:3 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Brand'' means a term, design, or trademark used in connection
with one or several grades of fertilizer.
                                             
 II. "Bulk fertilizer'' means a fertilizer distributed in a
non-packaged form.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food or the commissioner's authorized agent.
                                             
 IV. "Deficiency'' means the amount of nutrient found by analysis
less than that guaranteed which may result from a lack of nutrient
ingredients or from lack of uniformity.
                                             
 V. "Distribute'' means to import, consign, manufacture, produce,
compound, mix, or blend fertilizer, or to offer for sale, sell, barter,
or otherwise supply fertilizer in this state.
                                             
 VI. "Distributor'' means any person who distributes.
                                             
 VI-a. "Enhanced efficiency fertilizer'' means lawn fertilizer
products with characteristics that allow increased plant uptake and
reduce potential of nutrient losses to the environment when compared to
an appropriate reference product.
                                             
 VII. "Fertilizer'' means any substance containing one or more
recognized plant nutrients which is used for its plant nutrient content
and which is designed for use or claimed to have value in promoting
plant growth, except unmanipulated animal and vegetable manures, marl,
lime, limestone, wood ashes, and other products exempted by rule by the
commissioner. "Fertilizer'' shall not include any horticultural growing
medium as defined in RSA 433-A:3, VI.
                                             
 VIII. "Fertilizer material'' means a fertilizer which:
                                             
 (a) Contains important quantities of no more than one of the
following primary plant nutrients, nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P), and
potassium (K); or
                                             
 (b) Has 85 percent or more of its plant nutrient content present
in the form of a single chemical compound; or
                                             
 (c) Is derived from a plant or animal residue or byproduct or
natural material deposit which has been processed in such a way that its
content of plant nutrients has not been materially changed except by
purification and concentration.
                                             
 IX. "Grade'' means the percentage of total nitrogen, available
phosphate, and soluble potash stated in whole numbers in the same terms,
order, and percentages as in the guaranteed analysis, provided that:
                                             
 (a) Specialty fertilizers may be guaranteed in fractional units
of less than one percent of total nitrogen, available phosphate, and
soluble potash.
                                             
 (b) Fertilizer materials, bone meal, manures, and similar
materials may be guaranteed in fractional units.
                                             
 X. "Guaranteed analysis'' means the minimum percentage by weight of
plant nutrients claimed to be present in a fertilizer.
                                             
 XI. "Investigational allowance'' means an allowance for variations
inherent in the taking, preparation, and analysis of an official sample
of fertilizer.
                                             
 XII. "Label'' means the display of all written, printed, or graphic
matter, upon the immediate container, or a statement accompanying a
fertilizer.
                                             
 XIII. "Labeling'' means all written, printed, or graphic matter,
upon or accompanying any fertilizer, or advertisements, brochures,
posters, television and radio announcements used in promoting the sale
of such fertilizer.
                                             
 XIV. "Mixed fertilizer'' means a fertilizer containing any
combination or mixture of fertilizer materials.
                                             
 XIV-a. "Natural inorganic fertilizer'' means a mineral nutrient
source that exists in or is produced by nature and may be altered from
its original state only by physical manipulation.
                                             
 XIV-b. "Natural organic turf fertilizer'' means materials derived
from either plant or animal products containing one or more elements
other than carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen which are essential for plant
growth. These materials may be subject to biological degradation
processes under normal conditions of aging, rainfall, sun-curing, air
drying, composting, rotting, enzymatic, or anaerobic/aerobic bacterial
action, or any combination of these. These materials shall not be mixed
with synthetic materials or changed in any physical or chemical manner
from their initial state except by manipulations such as drying,
cooking, chopping, grinding, shredding, hydrolysis, or pelleting. These
products may be supplemented with natural inorganic fertilizers not
containing phosphorus.
                                             
 XV. "Official sample'' means any sample of fertilizer taken by the
commissioner and designated as "official'' by the commissioner.
                                             
 XVI. "Percent'' or "percentage'' means the percentage by weight.
                                             
 XVII. "Person'' means any individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, association, cooperative, business trust, or legal entity
of any kind.
                                             
 XVIII. "Primary nutrient'' means nitrogen, available phosphate, and
soluble potash.
                                             
 XIX. "Registrant'' means the person who registers fertilizer under
the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 XX. "Specialty fertilizer'' means a fertilizer distributed for
non-farm use.
                                             
 XXI. "Ton'' means a net weight of 2,000 pounds avoirdupois.
                                             
 XXII. "Turf'' or "lawn'' means non-agricultural land planted in
closely mowed, managed grasses except golf courses, parks, athletic
fields, and sod farms.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5; 233:1. 1997, 141:3, eff. Jan. 1,
1998. 2013, 42:2-4, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 431:4

 **431:4 Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Each brand and grade of fertilizer shall be registered in the
name of that person whose name appears upon the label before being
distributed in this state. The application for registration shall be
submitted to the commissioner on a form furnished by the commissioner
and shall be accompanied by a fee of 
                                             $75 per grade of each brand sold.
                                             
 II. The fees collected under this section shall be deposited with
the state treasurer into the general fund as unrestricted revenue.
                                             
 III. Upon approval by the commissioner, a copy of the registration
shall be furnished to the applicant. All registrations expire on
December 31 of each year. The application shall include the following
information:
                                             
 (a) The brand and grade.
                                             
 (b) The guaranteed analysis.
                                             
 (c) The name and address of the registrant.
                                             
 (d) Net weight.
                                             
 IV. A distributor shall not be required to register any fertilizer
which is already registered under this section by another person,
providing the label does not differ in any respect.
                                             
 V. A distributor shall not be required to register each grade of
fertilizer formulated according to specifications which are furnished by
a consumer prior to mixing, but shall be required to label such
fertilizer as provided in RSA 431:5, III.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2003, 229:2,
eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 431:4-a

 **431:4-a Nitrogen Content of Fertilizer. –**
                                             
 I. No turf fertilizer sold at retail shall exceed 0.7 pounds per
1,000 square feet of soluble nitrogen per application when applied
according to the instructions on the label.
                                             
 II. No turf fertilizer sold at retail shall exceed 0.9 pounds per
1,000 square feet of total nitrogen per application when applied
according to the instructions on the label.
                                             
 III. No turf fertilizer shall exceed an annual application of 3.25
pounds per 1,000 square feet of total nitrogen when applied according to
the instructions on the label.
                                             
 IV. No enhanced efficiency fertilizer shall exceed a single
application rate of 2.5 lbs. per 1,000 square feet of total nitrogen and
an annual application rate of 3.25 pounds per 1,000 square feet of total
nitrogen nor release at greater than 0.7 pounds per 1,000 square feet
per month when applied according to the instructions on the label.

**Source.** 2013, 42:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 431:4-b

 **431:4-b Phosphorus Content of Fertilizer. –**
                                             
 I. No fertilizer sold at retail that is intended for use on turf
shall exceed a content level of 0.67% available phosphate unless
specifically labeled for establishing new lawns, for repairing a lawn,
for seeding, or for use when a soil test indicates a phosphorus
deficiency.
                                             
 II. No fertilizer sold at retail that is intended for use on newly
established or repaired lawns, or for lawns testing deficient in
phosphorus shall exceed an application rate of one pound per 1,000
square feet annually of available phosphate.
                                             
 III. No natural organic turf fertilizer shall exceed a per
application rate of one pound of available phosphate per 1,000 square
feet when applied according to the instructions on the label.

**Source.** 2013, 42:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 431:4-c

 **431:4-c Existing Inventories. –** No provision of RSA 431:4-a or
RSA 431:4-b shall restrict the continued sale by retailers of any
fertilizer from any existing inventories in stock on December 31, 2013.

**Source.** 2013, 42:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 431:4-d

 **431:4-d Preemption of Local Regulation. –** Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this subdivision, no ordinance or regulation of
local government, including but not limited to, an action by a local
governmental agency or department, a county board of commissioners or a
city council, or a local regulation adopted by the use of an initiative
measure, may prohibit or in any way attempt to regulate any matter
relating to the registration, sale, formulation, or transportation of
fertilizer.

**Source.** 2013, 42:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 431:5

 **431:5 Labels. –**
                                             
 I. Any fertilizer distributed in this state in containers shall have
placed on or affixed to the container a label setting forth in clearly
legible and conspicuous form the following information:
                                             
 (a) Net weight.
                                             
 (b) Brand and grade, provided that the grade shall not be
required when no primary nutrients are claimed.
                                             
 (c) Guaranteed analysis in the following order and form:

     Total Nitrogen (N) _______ %
     Available Phosphate (P''2%48O''5%48) _______ %
     Soluble Potash (K''2%48O) _______ %


                                             
 (1) For unacidulated mineral phosphatic material and basic
slag, bone, tankage, and other organic phosphatic materials, the total
phosphate and or degree of fineness may also be guaranteed.
                                             
 (2) Guarantees for plant nutrients, other than nitrogen,
phosphorous and potassium, may be permitted or required by rule by the
commissioner. The guarantees for such other nutrients shall be expressed
in the form of the element. The source (oxides, salts, chelates, etc.)
of such other nutrients may be required to be stated on the application
for registration and may be included on the label. Other beneficial
substances or compounds, determinable by laboratory methods, also may be
guaranteed by permission of the commissioner and with the advice of the
director of the agricultural experiment station. When any plant
nutrients or other substances or compounds are guaranteed, they shall be
subject to inspection and analysis in accord with the methods and rules
adopted by the commissioner.
                                             
 (d) Name and address of the registrant.
                                             
 II. In the case of bulk shipments, the information required in
paragraph I in written or printed form shall accompany delivery and be
supplied to the purchaser at the time of delivery.
                                             
 III. A fertilizer formulated according to specifications which are
furnished by a consumer prior to mixing shall be labeled to show the net
weight, the guaranteed analysis, and the name and address of the
distributor or registrant.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:6

 **431:6 Inspection Fees and Tonnage Reports. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be paid to the commissioner for all fertilizers
distributed in this state to nonregistrants an inspection fee on each
ton of fertilizer sold in a manner and at a fee prescribed by the
commissioner by rules; provided, that sales or exchanges between
importers, manufacturers, distributors, or registrants are exempted.
                                             
 II. Every registrant who distributes fertilizer in the state shall
file with the commissioner a semiannual statement for the reporting
period setting forth the number of net tons of each fertilizer so
distributed in this state during such period. The report shall be due on
or before 30 days following the close of the filing period and upon
filing such statement the registrant shall pay an inspection fee. If the
tonnage report is not filed and the payment of inspection fees is not
made within 30 days after the end of the specified filing period, a
collection fee, amounting to 10 percent (minimum 
                                             $10) of the amount
due, shall be assessed against the registrant and added to the amount
due.
                                             
 III. When more than one person is involved in the distribution of a
fertilizer, the last person who has the fertilizer registered and who
distributed to a nonregistrant dealer or consumer is responsible for
reporting the tonnage and paying the inspection fee, unless the report
and payment is made by a prior distributor of the fertilizer.
                                             
 IV. Fees collected under this section shall be deposited with the
state treasurer into the general fund as unrestricted revenue.
                                             
 V. No information furnished the commissioner under this section
shall be disclosed in such a way as to divulge the operation of any
person.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:7

 **431:7 Inspection, Sampling, and Analysis. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to sample, inspect, make
analyses of, and test fertilizers distributed within this state at any
time and place and to such an extent as the commissioner may deem
necessary to determine whether such fertilizers are in compliance with
the provisions of this subdivision. The commissioner is authorized to
enter upon any public or private premises or carriers during regular
business hours in order to access fertilizer subject to provisions of
this subdivision and the rules adopted pursuant to it, and the records
relating to their distribution and storage.
                                             
 II. The methods of sampling and analysis shall be those adopted by
the Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC). In cases not
covered by such methods, or in cases where methods are available in
which improved applicability has been demonstrated, the commissioner may
adopt by rule such appropriate methods from other sources.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, in determining for administrative purposes
whether any fertilizer is deficient in plant food, shall be guided
solely by the official sample as defined in RSA 431:3, and obtained and
analyzed as provided for in paragraph II of this section.
                                             
 IV. The results of official analysis of fertilizers and portions of
official samples shall be distributed by the commissioner as provided by
rule. Official samples establishing a penalty for nutrient deficiency
shall be retained for a minimum of 90 days from issuance of a deficiency
report.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:8

 **431:8 Plant Food Deficiency. –**
                                             
 I. When the official analysis under RSA 431:7 shall show that a
fertilizer is deficient in nitrogen, available phosphate, and/or soluble
potash in accordance with the provisions of subparagraphs (a) and (b),
then a penalty payment of 3 times the value of such deficiency shall be
assessed. When a fertilizer is subject to a penalty payment under both
(a) and (b), the larger penalty payment shall apply. A fertilizer is
deficient when:
                                             
 (a) One or more of its guaranteed primary plant nutrients are
beyond the investigational allowances established by rule; or
                                             
 (b) The overall index value of the fertilizer is below the level
established by rule.
                                             
 II. Penalty payments for deficiencies beyond the investigational
allowances as established by rule for any other constituent covered
under RSA 431:5, I(c)(2), which the registrant is required to or may
guarantee, shall be evaluated and penalty payments prescribed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 III. All penalty payments assessed under this section shall be paid
by the registrant to the commissioner within 3 months of receiving
written notification from the commissioner of the penalty notice.
                                             
 IV. Penalty payments received from the registrant shall be refunded
to the consumer of the fertilizer which has been analyzed and found
deficient, provided that the purchase is of one ton or more. Penalty
payments on lots of fertilizer which have been analyzed and found
deficient and whose purchaser cannot be found shall be deposited in the
general fund as unrestricted revenue.
                                             
 V. If, upon satisfactory evidence, a person is shown to have altered
the content of a fertilizer shipped to such person by a registrant, or
to have mixed or commingled fertilizer from 2 or more suppliers such
that the result of either alteration changes the analysis of the
fertilizer as originally guaranteed, then that person shall become
responsible for obtaining a registration and shall be held liable for
all penalty payments and be subject to other provisions of this
subdivision, including seizure, condemnation, and stop sale.
                                             
 VI. A deficiency in an official sample of mixed fertilizer resulting
from nonuniformity is not distinguishable from a deficiency due to
actual plant nutrient shortage and is properly subject to official
action.
                                             
 VII. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent any person from
appealing to a court of competent jurisdiction seeking judgment as to
the justification of such penalty payments.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:9

 **431:9 Commercial Value. –** For the purpose of determining the
commercial value to be applied under the provisions of RSA 431:8, the
commissioner shall determine and publish annually the values per unit of
nitrogen, available phosphate, and soluble potash in fertilizers in this
state. The value so determined and published shall be used in
determining and assessing penalty payments.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:10

 **431:10 Misbranding. –** No person shall distribute misbranded
fertilizer. A fertilizer shall be deemed to be misbranded if:
                                             
 I. Its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
                                             
 II. It is distributed under the name of another fertilizer product.
                                             
 III. It is not labeled as required in RSA 431:5 and in accordance
with rules adopted under this subdivision.
                                             
 IV. It purports to be or is represented as a fertilizer, or is
represented as containing a plant nutrient or fertilizer unless such
plant nutrient or fertilizer conforms to the definition of identity, if
any, prescribed by rule of the commissioner. In adopting such rules, the
commissioner shall give due regard to commonly accepted definitions and
official fertilizer terms such as those issued by the Association of
American Plant Food Control Officials.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:11

 **431:11 Adulteration. –** No person shall distribute an adulterated
fertilizer product. A fertilizer shall be deemed to be adulterated if:
                                             
 I. It contains any deleterious or harmful ingredient in sufficient
amount to render it injurious to beneficial plant, animal, human, or
aquatic life or to soil or water when applied in accordance with
directions for use on the label, or if adequate warning statements or
directions for use which may be necessary to protect plant life, animal,
human, or aquatic life or soil or water are not shown upon the label.
                                             
 II. Its composition falls below or differs from that which it is
purported to possess by its labeling.
                                             
 III. It contains unwanted crop seed or weed seed.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:12

 **431:12 Publications. –** The commissioner shall publish in such
forms as the commissioner deems proper:
                                             
 I. Information concerning the distribution of fertilizers.
                                             
 II. Results of analyses based on official samples of fertilizer
distributed within the state as compared with the analyses guaranteed
under RSA 431:4 and RSA 431:5.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:13

 **431:13 Rulemaking. –** For the enforcement of this subdivision,
the commissioner shall adopt under RSA 541-A, after public hearing, such
rules relating to investigational allowances, definitions, records,
distribution, storage, use, and application of fertilizers as may be
necessary to carry into effect the full intent and meaning of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:14

 **431:14 Shortweight. –** If any fertilizer in the possession of the
consumer is found by the commissioner to be short in weight, the
registrant of the fertilizer shall within 30 days after official notice
from the commissioner submit to the consumer a penalty payment of 4
times the value of the actual shortage.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:15

 **431:15 Cancellation of Registrations. –** The commissioner may
cancel the registration of any brand of fertilizer or may refuse to
register any brand of fertilizer as provided in this subdivision, upon
satisfactory evidence that the registrant has used fraudulent or
deceptive practices in the evasion or the attempted evasion of the
provisions of this subdivision or any rules adopted thereunder. No
registration shall be revoked or refused until the registrant shall have
been given the opportunity to appear for a hearing by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:16

 **431:16 Stop Sale Orders. –** The commissioner may issue and
enforce a written or printed "stop sale, use, or removal'' order to the
owner of any lot of fertilizer and hold such fertilizer at a designated
place when the commissioner finds the fertilizer is being offered or
exposed for sale in violation of any of the provisions of this
subdivision until the law has been complied with and the fertilizer is
released in writing by the commissioner, or the violation has been
otherwise legally disposed of by written authority. The commissioner
shall release the fertilizer so withdrawn when this subdivision has been
complied with and all costs and expenses incurred in connection with the
withdrawal have been paid.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:17

 **431:17 Seizure, Condemnation, and Sale. –** Any lot of fertilizer
not in compliance with the provisions of this subdivision shall be
subject to seizure on complaint of the commissioner to a court of
competent jurisdiction in the area in which the fertilizer is located.
In the event the court finds the fertilizer to be in violation of this
subdivision and orders the condemnation of the fertilizer, it shall be
disposed of in any manner consistent with the quality of the fertilizer
and the laws of the state. In no instance shall the disposition of the
fertilizer be ordered by the court without first giving the claimant an
opportunity to apply to the court for release of the fertilizer or for
permission to process or relabel the fertilizer to bring it into
compliance with this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:18

 **431:18 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, personally or through an agent, violates any
provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may apply for and the court may grant a
temporary or permanent injunction restraining any person from violating
or continuing to violate any of the provisions of this subdivision or
any rule adopted hereunder, notwithstanding the existence of other
remedies at law. The injunction shall be issued without bond.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:19

 **431:19 Cooperation With Other Entities. –** The commissioner may
cooperate with and enter into agreement with governmental agencies of
this state, other states, and agencies of the federal government in
order to carry out the purpose of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:20

 **431:20 Exchanges Between Manufacturers. –** Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to restrict or avoid sale or exchanges of
fertilizers to each other by importers, manufacturers, or manipulators
who mix fertilizer materials for sale, or as preventing the free and
unrestricted shipments of fertilizer to manufacturers or manipulators
who have registered their brands as required by provisions of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:21

 **431:21 Penalties. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 233:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.
                                             ]

Agricultural Liming Materials
-----------------------------

### Section 431:22

 **431:22 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known as the "New
Hampshire Agricultural Liming Materials Act.''

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:23

 **431:23 Administration. –** This subdivision shall be administered
by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:24

 **431:24 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Agricultural liming materials'' means a product whose calcium
and magnesium compounds are capable of neutralizing soil acidity.
                                             
 II. "Limestone'' means a material consisting essentially of calcium
carbonate or a combination of calcium carbonate with magnesium carbonate
capable of neutralizing soil acidity.
                                             
 III. "Burnt lime'' means a material made from limestone which
consists essentially of calcium oxide or a combination of calcium oxide
with magnesium oxide.
                                             
 IV. "Hydrated lime'' means a material, made from burnt lime, which
consists of calcium hydroxide or a combination of calcium hydroxide with
magnesium oxide or magnesium hydroxide or both.
                                             
 V. "Marl'' means a granular or loosely consolidated earthy material
composed largely of seashell fragments, eggshell fragments, and calcium
carbonate.
                                             
 VI. "Industrial byproduct'' means any industrial waste or byproduct
containing calcium or calcium and magnesium in forms that will
neutralize soil acidity.
                                             
 VII. "Brand'' means the term, designation, trademark, product name
or other specific designation under which individual agricultural liming
material is offered for sale.
                                             
 VIII. "Fineness'' means the percentage by weight of the material
which will pass U.S. Standard sieves of specified sizes.
                                             
 IX. "Ton'' means a net weight of 2,000 pounds avoirdupois.
                                             
 X. "Percent'' or "percentage'' means by weight.
                                             
 XI. "Bulk'' means in nonpackaged form.
                                             
 XII. "Label'' means any written or printed matter on or attached to
the package or on the delivery ticket which accompanies bulk shipments.
                                             
 XIII. "Person'' means individual, partnership, association, firm, or
corporation.
                                             
 XIV. "Calcium carbonate equivalent'' means the acid-neutralizing
capacity of an agricultural liming material expressed as weight
percentage of calcium carbonate.
                                             
 XV. "Weight'' means the weight of undried material as offered for
sale.
                                             
 XVI. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food or authorized agent.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5; 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2003,
181:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 431:25

 **431:25 Labeling. –**
                                             
 I. Agricultural liming materials sold, offered, or exposed for sale
in the state shall have affixed to the outside of each package in a
conspicuous manner, a plainly printed, stamped, or otherwise marked
label, tag or statement, or in the case of bulk sales, a delivery slip,
setting forth at least the following information:
                                             
 (a) The name and principal office address of the manufacturer or
distributor.
                                             
 (b) The brand or trade name of the material.
                                             
 (c) The identification of the product as to the type of the
agricultural liming material.
                                             
 (d) The net weight of the agricultural liming material.
                                             
 (e) The minimum percentage of calcium oxide and magnesium oxide
and/or calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate.
                                             
 (f) The calcium carbonate equivalent as determined by methods
prescribed by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC)
International. Minimum calcium carbonate equivalents shall be as
prescribed by rule.
                                             
 (g) The minimum percent by weight passing through U.S. Standards
sieves as prescribed by rule.
                                             
 II. No information or statement shall appear on any package, label,
delivery slip, or advertising matter which is false or misleading to the
purchaser as to the quality, analysis, type, or composition of the
agricultural liming material.
                                             
 III. In the case of any material which has been adulterated
subsequent to packaging, labeling or loading and before delivery to the
consumer, a plainly marked notice to that effect shall be affixed by the
vendor to the package or delivery slip to identify the kind and degree
of such adulteration.
                                             
 IV. At every site from which agricultural liming materials are
delivered in bulk and at every place where consumer orders for bulk
deliveries are placed, there shall be conspicuously posted a copy of the
statement required by this section for each brand of material.
                                             
 V. When the commissioner finds, after public hearing following due
notice under rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A, that the
requirement for expressing the calcium and magnesium in elemental form
would not impose an economic hardship on distributors and users of
agricultural liming materials by reason of conflicting label
requirements among the states, the commissioner may require by rule that
the minimum percentage of calcium oxide and magnesium oxide and/or
calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate shall be expressed in the
following form:

     Total Calcium (Ca) .................. percent
     Total Magnesium (Mg) .................. percent


                                             
The effective date of such a rule shall be not less than 6 months
following the adoption of the rule, and for a period of 2 years
following the effective date of the rule, the equivalent of calcium and
magnesium may also be shown in the form of calcium oxide and magnesium
oxide and/or calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:26

 **431:26 Prohibited Acts. –**
                                             
 I. No agricultural liming material shall be sold or offered for sale
in this state unless it complies with the provisions of this subdivision
and rules pertaining to this subdivision.
                                             
 II. No agricultural liming material shall be sold or offered for
sale in this state which contains toxic materials in quantities
injurious to plant, animal, human, or aquatic life or to soil or water.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:27

 **431:27 Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Each separately identified product shall be registered before
being distributed in this state. The application for registration shall
be submitted to the commissioner on a form furnished or approved by the
commissioner and shall be accompanied by a fee of 
                                             $50 per product. The
fees collected under this section shall be deposited with the state
treasurer into the general fund as unrestricted revenue. Upon approval
by the commissioner, a copy of the registration shall be furnished to
the applicant. All registrations expire on January 1 of the following
year.
                                             
 II. A distributor shall not be required to register any brand of
agricultural liming material which is already registered under this act
by another person, providing the label does not differ in any respect.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:28

 **431:28 Report of Tonnage. –**
                                             
 I. Within 30 days following the expiration of registration, each
registrant shall submit, on a form approved by the commissioner, an
annual statement setting forth the number of net tons of each
agricultural liming material sold by such registrant for use in the
state during the previous 12-month period.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall publish in such forms as the commissioner
deems proper a composite report showing the tons of agricultural liming
material sold in the state. This report shall in no way divulge the
operation of any registrant.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:29

 **431:29 Inspection, Sampling, and Analysis. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the commissioner, who may act through an
authorized agent, to sample, inspect, make analyses of, and test
agricultural liming materials distributed within this state as the
commissioner deems necessary to determine whether such agricultural
liming materials are in compliance with the provisions of this
subdivision. The commissioner, individually or through an agent, is
authorized to enter upon any public or private premises or carriers
during regular business hours in order to have access to agricultural
liming material subject to the provisions of this subdivision and rules
pertaining to this subdivision, and to the records relating to their
distribution.
                                             
 II. The methods of analysis and sampling shall be those approved by
the commissioner and shall be guided by AOAC International procedures.
                                             
 III. The results of official analyses of agricultural liming
materials and portions of official samples shall be distributed by the
commissioner as provided in the rules at least annually.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:30

 **431:30 Stop Sale Orders. –** The commissioner may issue and
enforce a written or printed "stop sale, or use or removal'' order to
the owner or custodian of any lot of agricultural liming material and
hold such material at a designated place when the commissioner finds the
agricultural liming material is being offered or exposed for sale in
violation of any of the provisions of this subdivision until the law has
been complied with and the agricultural liming material is released in
writing by the commissioner, or the violation has been otherwise legally
disposed of by written authority. The commissioner shall release the
agricultural liming material so withdrawn, when the requirements of the
provisions of this subdivision have been complied with and all costs and
expenses incurred in connection with the withdrawal have been paid.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:31

 **431:31 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, individually or through a servant or agent,
violates any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this
subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent
offense, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person,
or guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 431:32

 **431:32 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A necessary to the proper enforcement and administration of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:7. 1995, 233:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

Manure, Agricultural Compost, and Chemical Fertilizer Handling
--------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 431:33

 **431:33 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Agricultural compost'' means mixtures of decomposing organic
matter, that may include manure, stored and managed on farms and used to
condition and fertilize soils used for production of agricultural
crops.
                                             
 II. "Commercial fertilizer'' means any substance containing one or
more recognized plant nutrients which is used for its plant nutrient
content and which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, except unmanipulated animal and vegetable
manures, marl, lime, limestone, wood ashes, and other products exempted
by rule by the commissioner.
                                             
 III. "Manure'' means the excreta of animals, including poultry, that
are kept or harbored as domesticated animals, together with bedding
materials used in housing such animals.

**Source.** 1991, 13:1, eff. June 18, 1991. 2005, 59:1, eff. July 22,
2005.

### Section 431:34

 **431:34 Best Management Practices. –** In consultation with the
agricultural advisory board, the commissioner of environmental services,
the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service, the New
Hampshire agricultural experiment station, the university of New
Hampshire cooperative extension, and other appropriate agencies, the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food shall identify and
publish the best management practices for handling manure, agricultural
compost, and commercial fertilizer. Such practices shall be based upon
the best available research and scientific data so as to permit the
maximum use of nutrient and soil conditioning values, while achieving
the least possible adverse impact upon the environment or human, animal
and plant health.

**Source.** 1991, 13:1. 1995, 130:5; 134:23; 206:2, eff. Aug. 11, 1995.
2005, 59:2, eff. July 22, 2005.

### Section 431:35

 **431:35 Improper Manure Handling. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall investigate complaints of improper
handling of manure, agricultural compost, and commercial fertilizer,
including, but not limited to, complaints of improper storage and
spreading. If the commissioner is able to identify the source of the
improper handling and has reason to believe such handling is a nuisance
caused by failure to use best management practices, the commissioner
shall:
                                             
 (a) Determine who is responsible for such handling.
                                             
 (b) Determine the changes needed in handling to comply with best
management practices.
                                             
 (c) Notify, in writing, the person responsible of the findings
and changes necessary to conform to best management practices.
                                             
 (d) Require a plan for compliance if the corrections, under RSA
431:35, I(c), have not been made within 10 days after notification.
                                             
 II. If the person responsible fails to implement the recommended
changes, the commissioner shall notify the health officer of the
municipality and the commissioner of environmental services, who shall
take such action as their authority permits.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1991, 13:1. 1996, 229:1. 1998, 60:2, eff. July 11, 1998.
2005, 59:3, eff. July 22, 2005.

Agricultural Nutrient Management Program
----------------------------------------

### Section 431:36

 **431:36 Program Established. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of agriculture, markets, and
food shall establish an agricultural nutrient management program. The
program shall assist agricultural land and livestock owners with efforts
to minimize potential adverse effects on waters of the state resulting
from agricultural nutrients including fertilizers, animal manures, and
agricultural compost. The purpose of the program shall be to provide
educational, technical, and financial assistance to agricultural land
owners with implementing best management practices as provided in RSA
431:34-35, and such other practices deemed necessary to mitigate water
pollution. The goal of the program is to assist and enable the continued
viability of farming in New Hampshire and the preservation of open space
in a manner that is compatible with the state's public health and
environmental objectives. The commissioner shall be authorized to accept
grants, gifts, and donations from any public or private sources for the
purposes stated in this paragraph.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall, within the biennial report pursuant to
RSA 20:7, report to the house environment and agriculture committee, the
senate environment committee, the house finance committee, and the
senate finance committee. The report shall include:
                                             
 (a) The use and current status of the fund;
                                             
 (b) The work accomplished;
                                             
 (c) The number of grantees and the amount of the grant received
by each; and
                                             
 (d) The effectiveness of the implementation of agricultural best
management practices needed to more fully protect water quality.

**Source.** 2001, 103:1, eff. July 1, 2001. 2015, 259:25, eff. July 1,
2015.
