---
title: 'CHAPTER 433-C INDUSTRIAL HEMP RESEARCH'
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 433-C
                                             
INDUSTRIAL HEMP RESEARCH
------------------------

### Section 433-C:1

 **433-C:1 Industrial Hemp Defined. –** "Industrial hemp'' means the
plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of such plant, whether growing or
not, with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than
0.3 percent on a dry weight basis.

**Source.** 2015, 233:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2015.

### Section 433-C:2

 **433-C:2 Authorization. –** An institution of higher education, as
defined in 20 U.S.C. section 1001, may grow or cultivate industrial
hemp, on site or off site, for purposes of research under an
agricultural pilot program or other agricultural or academic research.
In addition to studying the plant's growth and cultivation, the research
shall also study the economics of industrial hemp, including markets and
processing. Industrial hemp grown or cultivated in accordance with this
chapter shall not be considered a controlled drug or controlled
substance under RSA 318-B.

**Source.** 2015, 233:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2015.

### Section 433-C:3

 **433-C:3 Regulation. –** All research shall be undertaken in
coordination with the department of agriculture, markets, and food. The
department may certify and register sites used to grow or cultivate
industrial hemp and may adopt rules to regulate such research to the
extent necessary to comport with 7 U.S.C. section 5940. Such rules shall
be exempt from RSA 541-A. All research projects shall conclude within 3
years of commencement.

**Source.** 2015, 233:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2015.
