---
title: 'CHAPTER 433-A HORTICULTURAL GROWING MEDIA'
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 433-A
                                             
HORTICULTURAL GROWING MEDIA
---------------------------

### Section 433-A:1

 **433-A:1 Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the "New Hampshire
Horticultural Growing Media Act.''

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:2

 **433-A:2 Enforcement; Rulemaking. –** This chapter shall be
administered by the commissioner of the department of agriculture,
markets, and food. The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A
necessary to the proper enforcement and administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:3

 **433-A:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Brand or product name'' means a specific designation applied to
an individual horticultural growing medium.
                                             
 II. "Bulk'' means not in a package or in packages of one cubic yard
or more.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 IV. "Custom medium'' means a horticultural growing medium which is
prepared to exact specifications of the person who will be planting in
the medium.
                                             
 V. "Distribute'' means to offer for sale, sell, barter, or exchange,
or otherwise supply or make available.
                                             
 VI. "Horticultural growing medium'' means any substance or mixture
of substances which is promoted or is intended to function as a
commercial or consumer growing medium for the managed growth of
horticultural crops in containers.
                                             
 VII. "Label'' means the display of all written, printed, or graphic
matter on or attached to the immediate container or, in the case of a
bulk product, accompanying the lot of horticultural growing medium.
Registration documents provided by manufacturers to the commissioner
shall not be part of the product label.
                                             
 VIII. "Labeling'' means, in addition to the label, any written,
printed, or graphic matter accompanying any horticultural growing
medium; any advertisements, brochures, or posters; or any television,
radio, or other announcements used in promoting the sale of a
horticultural growing medium. Registration documents provided by
manufacturers to the commissioner shall not be part of product
labeling.
                                             
 IX. "Person'' means individuals, partnerships, corporations, other
organized bodies or entities, or any combination of them.
                                             
 X. "Registrant'' means the person whose name appears on the label of
a horticultural growing medium and who is responsible for labeling and
guaranteeing such medium label claims.
                                             
 XI. "Verification of label claims'' means the information of an
explanatory nature describing how the registrant determined the
truthfulness and accuracy of the registrant's words or statements
describing the product according to recognized standards.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:4

 **433-A:4 Inspections. –** The commissioner may inspect or cause to
be inspected by duly authorized employees any products sold as
horticultural growing media. For this purpose, the commissioner shall
have the power to enter into or upon any point of sale during operating
hours upon notice and to open and sample any bulk material, bundle,
package, or other container containing or thought to contain any
horticultural growing medium or to inspect labels.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:5

 **433-A:5 Registration and Labeling; Rulemaking. –** The
commissioner may adopt such rules under RSA 541-A as the commissioner
deems necessary to ensure the accuracy or truthfulness of labels,
labeling, registration documents, and content of horticultural growing
media, including but not limited to:
                                             
 I. Requiring that all registrants of horticultural growing media
register each product name with the commissioner and supply the
commissioner with a complete label for each product name.
                                             
 II. Require every person registering any horticultural growing
medium in this state to furnish on forms supplied by the commissioner
such information as the commissioner may require on labeling,
verification of label claims, or composition of any horticultural
growing medium.
                                             
 III. Requiring that all registrants of horticultural growing media
supply analyses of horticultural growing media they have distributed,
upon request of the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. Specifying the contents of the label and the manner of
expressing the contents required on each package or accompanying each
bulk shipment of horticultural growing media, provided that product
labels shall not require terms or manners of expression which shall
interfere with interstate commerce.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:6

 **433-A:6 Registration and Inspection Fees; Fund Established. –**
The commissioner shall collect a 
                                             $50 annual registration and inspection
fee for each product registered. The fees collected under this section
shall be deposited with the state treasurer into the agriculture
products and scale testing fund established in RSA 435:20, IV. Moneys
from the fund shall be used to offset costs associated with registration
and inspection of horticultural growing media.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:7

 **433-A:7 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. Distribution of horticultural growing media planted with live
plant material is exempt from the labeling and registration requirements
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. Distribution of horticultural growing media that is sold to
consumers at the site of production and is not distributed by other
means or intended for commercial use is exempt from the registration
requirements imposed pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 III. Distribution of custom media is exempt from registration
requirements imposed pursuant to this chapter provided it is prepared
for a single end user.
                                             
 IV. Distribution of horticultural growing media with applied plant
nutrients shall be exempt from the requirements of RSA 431:1-20.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:8

 **433-A:8 Revocation of Registration or License. –** The
commissioner is authorized to revoke registrations of any person or to
refuse to register horticultural growing media upon satisfactory
evidence that the registrant or person has used fraudulent or deceptive
practices in the evasion or attempted evasion of the provisions of this
chapter or of any rules adopted under this chapter. No registration
shall be revoked or denied until the registrant or person has been
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and
place of the hearing and has been given an opportunity to appear and be
heard by the commissioner or an authorized representative.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:9

 **433-A:9 "Stop Sale'' Orders. –** The commissioner may issue and
enforce a written or printed "stop sale, use, or removal'' order to the
owner or custodian of any lot of horticultural growing media and to hold
at a designated place when the commissioner finds the horticultural
growing media is being offered or exposed for sale in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter until the law has been complied with
and such horticultural growing media is released in writing by the
commissioner, or the violation has been otherwise legally disposed of by
written authority. The commissioner shall release the horticultural
growing media so withdrawn when the requirements of the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with and all costs and expenses
incurred, as established by rule, in connection with the withdrawal have
been paid.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:10

 **433-A:10 Injunctions. –** The commissioner is authorized to apply
for and the court is authorized to grant a temporary or permanent
injunction restraining any person from violating or continuing to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule adopted under
this chapter notwithstanding the existence of other remedies at law. Any
such injunction shall be issued with bond.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:11

 **433-A:11 Unlawful Acts. –** It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
                                             
 I. Distribute an unregistered horticultural growing medium, unless
exempted from the registration requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Distribute a horticultural growing medium if the label on such
medium does not reflect its composition.
                                             
 III. Fail to supply the commissioner with analyses of horticultural
growing media when requested by the commissioner or a person authorized
by the commissioner under this chapter to make such requests.
                                             
 IV. Distribute an adulterated horticultural growing medium. Such
medium shall be deemed to be adulterated if:
                                             
 (a) It contains any deleterious or harmful ingredient in
sufficient amount to render it injurious to beneficial plant, animal,
human, or aquatic life or to soil or water when applied in accordance
with directions for use on the label, or if adequate warning statements
or directions for use which may be necessary to protect plant, animal,
human, or aquatic life or soil or water are not shown upon the label.
                                             
 (b) Its composition falls below or differs significantly from
that which it is purported to possess by its labeling.
                                             
 (c) It contains viable weed seed exceeding the amounts specified
in RSA 433:4, I(d)-(e).
                                             
 V. Fail to cease distribution of any horticultural growing medium
for which the commissioner has issued a stop sale order.
                                             
 VI. Obstruct the commissioner in the performance of the
commissioner's duties under this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 433-A:12

 **433-A:12 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, individually or through a servant or agent,
violates any provision of this chapter or rule adopted under this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if an individual, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any
rule adopted or order issued under this chapter shall, in addition, be
liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each violation,
for each day of a continuing violation, which may be collected in a
civil action or in connection with an action for injunctive relief
brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any
rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the imposition of
an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1997, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
