---
title: 'CHAPTER 433 SEEDS, PLANTS AND NURSERY STOCK'
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 433
                                             
SEEDS, PLANTS AND NURSERY STOCK
-------------------------------

New Hampshire Seed Law
----------------------

### Section 433:1

 **433:1 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Advertisement'' means all representations, other than those on
the label, disseminated in any manner or by any means, relating to seed
within the scope of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. "Agricultural seed'' includes grass, forage, cereal, oil, fiber,
and other kinds of crop seeds commonly recognized within this state as
agricultural seeds, lawn seeds, and combinations of such seeds, and may
include noxious weed seeds when the commissioner determines that such
seed is being used as agricultural seed.
                                             
 III. "Blend'' means seed consisting of more than one variety of a
kind, each in excess of 5 percent by weight of the whole.
                                             
 IV. "Brand'' means a word, name, symbol, number, or design used to
identify seed of one person to distinguish it from seed of another
person.
                                             
 V. "Certifying agency'' means an agency:
                                             
 (a) Authorized under the laws of a state, territory or possession
to officially certify seed and which has standards and procedures
approved by the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture to assure the genetic
purity and identity of the seed certified; or
                                             
 (b) Of a foreign country determined by the U.S. Secretary of
Agriculture to adhere to procedures and standards for seed certification
comparable to those adhered to generally by seed certifying agencies
under subparagraph (a).
                                             
 VI. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food.
                                             
 VII. "Complete record'' means any and all information which relates
to the origin, treatment, germination, purity, kind and variety of each
lot of agricultural seed sold in this state, or which relates to the
treatment, germination, kind and variety of each lot of vegetable seed
sold in this state. Such information includes seed samples and records
of declarations, labels, purchases, sales, conditioning, bulking,
treatment, handling, storage, analyses, tests and examinations.
                                             
 VIII. "Conditioning'' means drying, cleaning, scarifying, and other
operations which could change the purity of germination of the seed and
require the seed lot to be retested to determine the label information.
                                             
 IX. "Dormant'' means viable seed, excluding hard seed, which fail to
germinate when provided the specified germination conditions for the
kind of seed in question.
                                             
 X. "Flower seeds'' includes seeds of herbaceous plants grown for
their blooms, ornamental foliage, or other ornamental parts, and
commonly known and sold under the name of flower seeds in this state.
                                             
 XI. "Genuine grower's declaration'' means a statement signed by the
grower which gives for each lot of seed the lot number; kind; variety,
if known; origin; weight; year of production; date of shipment; and to
whom the shipment was made.
                                             
 XII. "Germination'' means the emergence and development from the
seed embryo of those essential structures which, for the kind of seed in
question, are indicative of the ability to produce a normal plant under
favorable conditions.
                                             
 XIII. "Hard seeds'' means seeds which remain hard at the end of the
prescribed test period because they have not absorbed water due to an
impermeable seed coat.
                                             
 XIV. "Hybrid'' means the first generation seed of a cross produced
by controlling the pollination and by combining (a) 2 or more inbred
lines; (b) one inbred or a single cross with an open pollinated variety;
or (c) 2 varieties or species, except open-pollinated varieties of corn
(Zea mays). The second generation or subsequent generations from such
crosses shall not be regarded as hybrids. Hybrid designations shall be
treated as variety names.
                                             
 XV. "Inert matter'' means all matter not seed, which includes broken
seeds, sterile florets, chaff, fungus bodies and stones as determined by
methods defined by rules adopted by the commissioner.
                                             
 XV-a. "Introduced wildflower'' means kinds, type, and varieties
derived from those kinds that are not indigenous to North America.
                                             
 XVI. "Kind'' means one or more related species or subspecies which
singly or collectively are known by one common name, including, but not
limited to, corn, oats, alfalfa, and timothy.
                                             
 XVII. "Labeling'' means a tag or other device attached to or
written, stamped, or printed on any container or accompanying any lot of
bulk seeds purporting to set forth the information required on the seed
label by this subdivision. Labeling may include any other information
relating to the labeled seed.
                                             
 XVIII. "Lot'' means a definite quantity of seed identified by a lot
number or other mark, every portion or bag of which is uniform within
recognized tolerances for the factors which appear in the labeling.
                                             
 XIX. "Mixture,'' "mix,'' or "mixed'' means seed consisting of more
than one kind, each in excess of 5 percent by weight of the whole.
                                             
 XIX-a. "Mulch'' means a protective covering of any suitable
substance placed with seed which acts to retain sufficient moisture to
support seed germination and sustain early seedling growth and aid in
the prevention of the evaporation of soil moisture, the control of
weeds, and the prevention of erosion.
                                             
 XIX-b. "Native wildflower'' means kinds or the types and varieties
derived from those kinds that are indigenous to North America.
                                             
 XX. "Off-type'' means any seed or plant not a part of the variety in
that it deviates in one or more characteristics from the variety as
described and may include: a seed or plant of another variety, a seed or
plant not necessarily any variety, a seed or plant resulting from
cross-pollination by another kind or variety, a seed or plant resulting
from uncontrolled self-pollination during production of hybrid seed, or
segregates from any of the above.
                                             
 XXI. "Other crop seed'' means seed of plants grown as crops, other
than the kind or variety included in the pure seed.
                                             
 XXII. "Origin,'' for an indigenous stand of trees, is the area on
which the trees are growing; for a non-indigenous stand, it is the place
from which the seeds or plants were originally introduced.
                                             
 XXIII. "Person'' means an individual, partnership, corporation,
company, association, receiver, trustee or agent.
                                             
 XXIV. "Prohibited noxious weed seeds'' means those weed seeds which
are prohibited from being present in agricultural, vegetable, flower,
tree, or shrub seed. They are the seeds of weeds which are highly
destructive and difficult to control by good cultural practices and the
use of herbicides.
                                             
 XXV. "Pure live seed'' means the product of the percent of
germination plus hard or dormant seed multiplied by the percent of pure
seed divided by 100. The result is expressed as a whole number.
                                             
 XXVI. "Pure seed'' means seed exclusive of inert matter and all
other seeds not of the seed being considered, as determined by methods
defined by rules adopted by the commissioner.
                                             
 XXVII. "Restricted noxious weed seeds'' means those weed seeds which
are objectionable in agricultural crops, lawns, and gardens of this
state and which can be controlled by good cultural practices or the use
of herbicides.
                                             
 XXVIII. "Seizure'' means a legal process carried out by court order
against a definite amount of seed.
                                             
 XXIX. "Stop sale order'' means an administrative order provided by
law, restraining the sale, use, disposition, and movement of a definite
amount of seed.
                                             
 XXX. "Treated'' means that the seed has received an application of a
substance, or that it has been subjected to a process for which a claim
is made.
                                             
 XXXI. "Tree and shrub seeds'' includes seeds of woody plants
commonly known and sold as tree and shrub seeds in this state.
                                             
 XXXII. "Tree seed collector's declaration'' means a statement signed
by a grower or person having knowledge of the place of collection
giving, for a lot of seed, the lot number; common or scientific name of
the species; subspecies, if appropriate; origin; elevation; and quantity
of tree and shrub seed.
                                             
 XXXIII. "Type'' means a group of varieties so nearly similar that
the individual varieties cannot be clearly differentiated except under
special conditions.
                                             
 XXXIII-a. "Undesirable grass seeds'' (UGS) means seeds of grass
species declared to be "restricted noxious weed'' seed when found in
lawn and turf seed.
                                             
 XXXIV. "Variant'' means any seed or plant which:
                                             
 (a) Is distinct within the variety but occurs naturally in the
variety;
                                             
 (b) Is stable and predictable with a degree of reliability
comparable to other varieties of the same kind, within recognized
tolerances, when the variety is reproduced or reconstituted; and
                                             
 (c) Was originally a part of the variety as released.
                                             
A variant is not an off-type.
                                             
 XXXV. "Variety'' means a subdivision of a kind which is distinct,
uniform, and stable; "distinct'' in the sense that the variety can be
differentiated by one or more identifiable morphological, physiological
or other characteristics from all other varieties of public knowledge;
"uniform'' in the sense that variations in essential and distinctive
characteristics are describable, and "stable'' in the sense that the
variety will remain unchanged in its essential and distinctive
characteristics and in its uniformity when reproduced or reconstituted
as required by the different categories of varieties.
                                             
 XXXVI. "Vegetable seeds'' includes the seeds of those crops which
are grown in gardens and on truck farms and are generally known and sold
under the name of vegetable or herb seeds in this state.
                                             
 XXXVII. "Weed seed'' means the seeds of all plants generally
recognized as weeds within this state, and includes prohibited and
restricted noxious weed seeds.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995. 2003, 106:1-3,
eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 433:2

 **433:2 Label Requirements for Agricultural, Vegetable and Flower
Seeds. –** Each container of agricultural, vegetable, and flower seeds
which is sold, offered for sale, or exposed for sale, or transported
within this state for sowing purposes shall bear on it or have attached
to it in a conspicuous place a plainly written or printed label or tag
in the English language, giving the following information, which
statement shall not be modified or denied in the labeling or on another
label attached to the container:
                                             
 I. For all treated agricultural, vegetable, and flower seeds, for
which a separate label may be used:
                                             
 (a) A word or statement indicating that the seed has been
treated.
                                             
 (b) The commonly accepted coined, chemical or abbreviated
chemical (generic) name of the applied substance or description of the
process used.
                                             
 (c) If the substance in the amount present with the seed is
harmful to human or other vertebrate animals, a caution statement such
as "Do not use for food, feed, or oil purposes.'' The caution for
mercurials and similarly toxic substances shall be a poison statement or
symbol.
                                             
 (d) If the seed is treated with an inoculant, the date beyond
which the inoculant is not to be considered effective (date of
expiration).
                                             
 II. For agricultural seeds, except for cool season lawn and turf
grass seed mixtures as provided in paragraph III; for seed sold on a
pure live seed basis as provided in paragraph IX; and for hybrids which
contain less than 95 percent hybrid seed as provided in paragraph X:
                                             
 (a) The name of the kind and variety for each agricultural seed
component present in excess of 5 percent of the whole and the percentage
by weight of each, provided that, if the variety of those kinds
generally labeled as to variety as designated in rules adopted by the
commissioner is not stated, the label shall show the name of the kind
and the words, "Variety Not Stated.'' Hybrids shall be labeled as
hybrids.
                                             
 (b) Lot number or other lot identification.
                                             
 (c) State or country of origin, if known, of alfalfa, red clover
and field corn, except hybrid corn. If the origin is unknown, the fact
shall be stated.
                                             
 (d) Percentage by weight of all weed seeds.
                                             
 (e) The name and rate of occurrence per pound of each kind of
restricted noxious weed seed present.
                                             
 (f) Percentage by weight of agricultural seeds, which may be
designated as "crop seeds,'' other than those required to be named on
the label.
                                             
 (g) Percentage by weight of inert matter.
                                             
 (h) For each named agricultural seed:
                                             
 (1) Percentage of germination, exclusive of hard seed.
                                             
 (2) Percentage of hard seeds, if present.
                                             
 (3) The calendar month and year the test was completed to
determine such percentages.
                                             
 Following (1) and (2) the "total germination and hard seed'' may be
stated as such, if desired.
                                             
 (i) Name and address of the person who labeled the seed, or who
sells, offers or exposes the seed for sale within this state.
                                             
 III. For cool season lawn and turf grasses including Kentucky
bluegrass, red fescue, chewing fescue, hard fescue, tall fescue,
perennial ryegrass, intermediate ryegrass, annual ryegrass, colonial
bentgrass, creeping bentgrass, and mixtures thereof:
                                             
 (a) For single kinds, the name of the kind or kind and variety.
                                             
 (b) For mixtures:
                                             
 (1) The word "mix,'' "mixed,'' "mixture,'' or "blend'' shall
be stated with the name of the mixture.
                                             
 (2) The heading "Pure Seed'' and "Germination'' or "Germ''
shall be used in the proper places.
                                             
 (3) Commonly accepted name of kind or kind and variety of each
agricultural seed component in excess of 5 percent of the whole, and the
percentage by weight of pure seed in order of its predominance and in
columnar form.
                                             
 (c) Percentage by weight of each agricultural seed component in
excess of 5 percent of the whole, and the percentage by weight of pure
seed in order of its predominance and in columnar form.
                                             
 (d) The percentage by weight of inert matter for lawn and turf
grass not to exceed 10 percent, except that 15 percent inert matter is
permitted in Kentucky bluegrass labeled without a variety name. Foreign
material, other than material used for coating or pelleting, as provided
in paragraph IV or combination products, as provided in paragraph XI, to
enhance the planting value, not common to grass seed, may not be added.
                                             
 (e) Percentage by weight of all weed seeds. Maximum weed seed
content not to exceed 1/2 of one percent by weight.
                                             
 (f) Noxious weeds and undesirable grass seed that are required to
be labeled will be listed under the heading "Noxious Weed Seeds'' or
"Undesirable Grass Seeds''. Undesirable grass seeds may not exceed 1/2
of one percent by weight.
                                             
 (g) For each agricultural seed name under subparagraphs (a) or
(b):
                                             
 (1) Percentage of germination, exclusive of hard seed;
                                             
 (2) Percentage of hard seed, if present;
                                             
 (3) Calendar month and year the test was completed to
determine such percentages. Oldest test date shall be used.
                                             
 (4) The statement "Sell by
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _'' which may
be no more than 15 months from the date of test exclusive of the month
of the test.
                                             
 (h) Name and address of the person who labeled said seed, or who
sells, offers, or exposes said seed for sale within the state.
                                             
 IV. For agricultural seeds that are coated:
                                             
 (a) Percentage by weight of pure seeds with coating material
removed.
                                             
 (b) Percentage by weight of coating material.
                                             
 (c) Percentage by weight of inert material, exclusive of coating
material.
                                             
 (d) Percentage of germination shall be determined on 400 pellets
with or without seeds.
                                             
 (e) In addition to the requirements of this paragraph, labeling
of coated seed shall comply with the requirements of paragraphs I, II,
and III.
                                             
 V. For vegetable seeds in packets as prepared for use in home
gardens or household plantings or vegetable seeds in preplanted
containers, mats, tapes, or other planting devices:
                                             
 (a) Name of kind and variety of seed.
                                             
 (b) Lot number or other identification.
                                             
 (c) The calendar month and year the germination test was
completed and the statement "Sell by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,'' which may
be no more than 12 months from the date of test exclusive of the month
or test or the percentage germination and the calendar month and year
the test was completed to determine such percentage provided that the
germination test must have been completed within 12 months exclusive of
the month of test.
                                             
 (d) Name and address of the person who labeled the seed or who
sells, offers, or exposes the seed for sale within this state.
                                             
 (e) For seeds which germinate less than the standard last
established by the commissioner under this subdivision:
                                             
 (1) Percentage of germination, exclusive of hard seed.
                                             
 (2) Percentage of hard seed, if present.
                                             
 (3) The words "below standard'' in not less than 8-point
type.
                                             
 (f) For seeds placed in a germination medium, mat, tape, or other
device in such a way as to make it difficult to determine the quantity
of seed without removing the seeds from the medium, mat, tape or device,
a statement to indicate the minimum number of seeds in the container.
                                             
 VI. For vegetable seeds in containers other than packets prepared
for use in home gardens or household plantings and other than preplanted
containers, mats, tapes, or other planting devices:
                                             
 (a) The name of each kind and variety present in excess of 5
percent and the percentage by weight of each in order of its
predominance.
                                             
 (b) Lot number or other lot identification.
                                             
 (c) For each named vegetable seed:
                                             
 (1) Percentage of germination, exclusive of hard seed.
                                             
 (2) Percentage of hard seed, if present.
                                             
 (3) The calendar month and year the test was completed to
determine such percentages.
                                             
 Following (1) and (2) the "total germination and hard seed'' may be
stated as such, if desired.
                                             
 (d) Name and address of the person who labeled the seed, or who
sells, offers or exposes the seed for sale within this state.
                                             
 (e) The labeling requirements for vegetable seeds in containers
of more than one pound shall be deemed to have been met if the seed is
weighed from a properly labeled container in the presence of the
purchaser.
                                             
 VII. For flower seeds in packets prepared for use in home gardens or
household plantings or flower seeds in preplanted containers, mats,
tapes, or other planting devices:
                                             
 (a) For all kinds of flower seeds:
                                             
 (1) The name of the kind and variety or a statement of type
and performance characteristics as prescribed in the rules adopted by
the commissioner under this subdivision.
                                             
 (2) The calendar month and year the germination test was
completed and the statement "Sell by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,'' which
may be no more than 12 months from the date of test exclusive of the
month of test or the percentage of germination and the calendar month
and year the test was completed to determine such percentage provided
that the germination test must have been completed within 12 months
exclusive of the month of test.
                                             
 (3) The name and address of the person who labeled the seed,
or who sells, offers, or exposes the seed for sale within this state.
                                             
 (b) For seeds of those kinds for which standard testing
procedures are prescribed and which germinate less than the germination
standard last established under the provisions of this subdivision:
                                             
 (1) Percentage of germination, exclusive of hard seed.
                                             
 (2) The words "below standard'' in not less than 8-point
type.
                                             
 (c) For seeds placed in a germination medium, mat, tape, or other
device in such a way as to make it difficult to determine the quantity
of seed without removing the seeds from the medium, mat, tape, or
device, a statement to indicate the minimum number of seeds in the
container.
                                             
 VIII. For flower seeds in containers other than packets and other
than pre-planted containers, mats, tapes, or other planting devices and
not prepared for use in home flower gardens or household plantings:
                                             
 (a) The name of the kind and variety or a statement of type and
performance characteristics as prescribed in rules adopted by
commissioner under this subdivision and for wildflowers, the genus and
species and subspecies, if appropriate.
                                             
 (b) The lot number or other lot identification.
                                             
 (c) For wildflower seed only with a pure seed percentage of less
than 90 percent:
                                             
 (1) The percentage by weight of each component listed in order
of their predominance;
                                             
 (2) The percentage by weight of weed seed if present; and
                                             
 (3) The percentage by weight of inert matter.
                                             
 (d) For those kinds of seed for which standard testing procedures
are prescribed:
                                             
 (1) Percentage germination exclusive of hard or dormant seed;
                                             
 (2) Percentage of hard or dormant seed, if present; and
                                             
 (3) The calendar month and year that the test was completed to
determine such percentages.
                                             
 (e) For those kinds of seed for which standard testing procedures
are not available, the year of production or collection.
                                             
 (f) The name and address of the person who labeled the seed or
who sells, offers, or displays the seed for sale within the state.
                                             
 IX. For agricultural seeds sold on a pure live seed basis, if in
accordance with rules adopted by the commissioner, each container shall
bear a label containing the information required by paragraph II
except:
                                             
 (a) The label need not show:
                                             
 (1) The percentage by weight of each agricultural seed
component as required by subparagraph II(a); or
                                             
 (2) The percentage by weight of inert matter as required by
subparagraph II(g).
                                             
 (b) The label shall show for each named agricultural seed,
instead of the information required by subparagraph II(h):
                                             
 (1) The percentage of pure live seed.
                                             
 (2) The calendar month and year in which the test determining
the percentage of pure live seed was completed.
                                             
 X. For agricultural and vegetable hybrid seed which contain less
than 95 percent hybrid seed:
                                             
 (a) Kind or variety shall be labeled as "hybrid.''
                                             
 (b) The percent which is hybrid shall be labeled parenthetically
following in direct association the named variety; i.e., Comet (85
percent hybrid).
                                             
 (c) Varieties in which the pure seed contain less than 75 percent
hybrid seed shall not be labeled hybrids.
                                             
 XI. For combination mulch, seed, and fertilizer products:
                                             
 (a) The word "combination'' followed by the words "mulch,''
"seed,'' or "fertilizer,'' as appropriate, must appear on the upper 30
percent of the principal display panel. The word "combination'' shall be
the largest and most conspicuous print on the container, equal to or
larger than the product name. The words "mulch,'' "seed,'' or
"fertilizer,'' shall be no smaller than 1/2 the size of the word
"combination'' and in close proximity to the word "combination.'' These
products shall contain a minimum of 70 percent mulch.
                                             
 (b) Agricultural, lawn, and turf seeds placed in a germination
medium, mat, tape, or other device or mixed with mulch shall be labeled
as follows:
                                             
 (1) Product name.
                                             
 (2) Lot number.
                                             
 (3) Percentage by weight of pure seed of each kind and variety
named which may be less than 5 percent.
                                             
 (4) Percentage by weight of other crop seed.
                                             
 (5) Percentage by weight of inert matter which shall not be
less than 70 percent.
                                             
 (6) Percentage by weight of weed seeds.
                                             
 (7) Name and number of noxious weed seeds per pound, if
present.
                                             
 (8) Percentage of germination, and hard seed if appropriate,
of each kind or kind and variety named and date of test.
                                             
 (9) Name and address of labeler.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990. 2003, 106:4-10, eff. Jan.
1, 2004.

### Section 433:3

 **433:3 Label Requirements for Tree and Shrub Seeds. –** Each
container of tree and shrub seed which is sold, offered for sale,
exposed for sale, or transported within this state for sowing purposes
shall bear on it or have attached to it in a conspicuous place a plainly
written or printed label or tag in the English language, giving the
following information, which statement shall not be modified or denied
in the labeling or on another label attached to the container, provided
that labeling of seed supplied under a contractual agreement may be done
by invoice accompanying the shipment or by an analysis tag attached to
the invoice if each bag or other container is clearly identified by a
lot number stenciled on the container or if the seed is in bulk. Each
bag or container that is not so identified shall carry complete
labeling. Labeling requirements shall be as follows:
                                             
 I. For all treated tree and shrub seeds, for which a separate label
may be used:
                                             
 (a) A word or statement indicating that the seed has been
treated.
                                             
 (b) The commonly accepted coined, chemical or abbreviated
chemical (generic) name of the applied substance or description of the
process used.
                                             
 (c) If the substance in the amount present with the seed is
harmful to human or other vertebrate animals, a caution statement such
as "Do not use for food or feed or oil purposes.'' The caution for
mercurials and similarly toxic substances shall be a poison statement
and symbol.
                                             
 (d) If the seed has been treated with an inoculant, the date
beyond which the inoculant is not to be considered effective, that is,
the date of expiration.
                                             
 II. For all tree and shrub seeds subject to this subdivision:
                                             
 (a) Common name of the species of seed and, if appropriate,
subspecies.
                                             
 (b) The scientific name of the genus and species, and, if
appropriate, subspecies.
                                             
 (c) Lot number or other lot identification.
                                             
 (d) Origin:
                                             
 (1) For seed collected from a predominantly indigenous stand,
the area of collection given by latitude and longitude, or geographic
description, or political subdivision such as state or county.
                                             
 (2) For seed collected from other than a predominantly
indigenous stand, the area of collection and the origin of the stand or
the words "Origin not Indigenous.''
                                             
 (e) The elevation or the upper and lower limits of elevations
within which the seed was collected.
                                             
 (f) Purity as a percentage of pure seed by weight.
                                             
 (g) For those species for which standard germination testing
procedures are prescribed in rules adopted by the commissioner, the
following:
                                             
 (1) Percentage of germination, exclusive of hard seed.
                                             
 (2) Percentage of hard seed, if present.
                                             
 (3) The calendar month and year the test was completed to
determine such percentages.
                                             
 (h) In lieu of subparagraph (g)(1)-(3), the seed may be labeled
"Test is in process; results will be supplied upon request.''
                                             
 (i) For those species for which standard germination testing
procedures have not been prescribed in rules adopted by the
commissioner, the calendar year in which the seed was collected.
                                             
 (j) The name and address of the person who labeled the seed or
who sells, offers, or exposes the seed for sale within this state.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 433:4

 **433:4 Prohibitions. –** It is unlawful for any person:
                                             
 I. To sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or transport for sale
any agricultural, vegetable, flower, or tree and shrub seeds within this
state:
                                             
 (a) If subject to the germination requirements of RSA 433:2,
unless otherwise provided in RSA 433:2, and unless the test to determine
the percentage of germination required by RSA 433:2 shall have been
completed within a 9-month period exclusive of the calendar month in
which the test was completed, immediately prior to sale, exposure for
sale, or offering for sale or transportation. This prohibition shall not
apply to tree and shrub seeds or to agricultural or vegetable seeds in
hermetically-sealed containers. Agricultural or vegetable seeds packaged
in hermetically-sealed containers under the conditions defined in rules
adopted under the provisions of this subdivision may be sold, exposed
for sale or offered for sale or transportation for a period of 36 months
after the last day of the month that the seeds were tested for
germination prior to packaging. If seeds in hermetically-sealed
containers are sold, exposed for sale, or offered for sale or
transportation more than 36 months after the last day of the month in
which they were tested prior to packaging, they shall have been retested
within a 9-month period, exclusive of the calendar month in which the
retest was completed, immediately prior to sale, exposure for sale, or
offering for sale or transportation.
                                             
 (b) Not labeled in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision or having false or misleading labeling.
                                             
 (c) Pertaining to which there has been false or misleading
advertisement.
                                             
 (d) Consisting of or containing prohibited noxious weed seeds,
subject to recognized tolerances.
                                             
 (e) Consisting of or containing restricted noxious weed seeds per
pound in excess of the number prescribed in rules adopted under this
subdivision, or in excess of the number declared or in excess of the
maximum percentage allowed for undesirable grass seed under RSA 433:2,
III(f) on the label attached to the container of the seed or associated
with the seed.
                                             
 (f) Containing more than 2 1/2 percent by weight of all weed
seeds.
                                             
 (g) If any labeling, advertising, or other representation subject
to this subdivision represents the seed to be certified seed or any
class thereof unless:
                                             
 (1) It has been determined by a seed certifying agency that
such seed conformed to standards of purity and identity as to kind;
species; subspecies, if appropriate; or variety, and also that tree seed
was found to be of the origin and elevation claimed, in compliance with
the rules or regulations of such agency pertaining to such seed; and,
                                             
 (2) The seed bears an official label issued for such seed by a
seed certifying agency certifying that the seed is of a specified class
and a specified kind; species; subspecies, if appropriate; or variety.
                                             
 (h) Labeled with a variety name but not certified by an official
seed certifying agency when it is a variety for which a United States
certificate of plant variety protection under the Plant Variety
Protection Act (7 U.S.C. § 2321 et seq.) specifies sale only as a class
of certified seed, provided that seed from a certified lot may be
labeled as to variety name when used in a mixture by, or with the
approval of, the owner of the variety.
                                             
 II. Within the state:
                                             
 (a) To detach, alter, deface, or destroy any label provided for
in this subdivision or in the rules adopted under this subdivision, or
to alter or substitute seed in a manner that may defeat the purpose of
this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) To disseminate any false or misleading advertisements
concerning seeds subject to this subdivision.
                                             
 (c) To hinder or obstruct any authorized person in the
performance of his duties under this subdivision.
                                             
 (d) To fail to comply with a stop sale order or to move or
otherwise handle or dispose of any lot of seed held under a stop sale
order or tags attached to it, except with express permission of the
enforcing officer and for the purpose specified by such officer.
                                             
 (e) To use the word "trace'' as a substitute for any statement
which is required.
                                             
 (f) To use the word "type'' in any labeling in connection with
the name of any agricultural seed variety.
                                             
 (g) To use relabeling stickers without having both the calendar
month and year the germination test was completed, the sell by date, as
stated in RSA 433:2, III(g), RSA 433:2, V(c), and RSA 433:2, VII(a), and
the lot number that matches the existing, original lot number.
Relabeling shall not occur more than once.
                                             
 (h) To alter or falsify any seed label, seed test, laboratory
report, record, or other document to create a misleading impression as
to kind, kind and variety, history, quality, or origin of seed.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990. 2003, 106:11-13, eff. Jan.
1, 2004.

### Section 433:5

 **433:5 Records. –** Each person whose name appears on the label as
handling agricultural, vegetable, flower, or tree and shrub seeds
subject to this subdivision shall keep for a period of at least 2 years
complete records of each lot of agricultural, vegetable, flower, or tree
and shrub seed handled and shall keep for at least one year a file
sample of each lot of seed after final disposition of such lot. All such
records and samples pertaining to the shipment or shipments involved
shall be accessible for inspection by the commissioner or his agent
during customary business hours.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 433:6

 **433:6 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of RSA 433:2, 3 and 4 shall not apply to:
                                             
 (a) Seed or grain not intended for sowing purposes.
                                             
 (b) Seed in storage in, or being transported to or consigned to a
cleaning or processing establishment for cleaning or processing,
provided that the invoice or labeling accompanying any shipment of such
seed bears the statement "seeds for processing''; and provided that any
labeling or other representation which may be made with respect to the
uncleaned or unprocessed seed shall be subject to this subdivision.
                                             
 (c) Any carrier with respect to any seed transported or delivered
for transportation in the ordinary course of its business as a carrier,
provided that such carrier is not engaged in producing, processing, or
marketing seeds subject to the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. No person shall be subject to a penalty under this subdivision
for having sold or offered for sale seeds subject to provisions of this
subdivision which were incorrectly labeled or represented as to kind;
species; subspecies, if appropriate; variety; type; origin; elevation;
or year of collection, if required, when the seeds cannot be identified
by examination of them, unless he has failed to obtain an invoice,
genuine grower's or tree seed collector's declaration or other labeling
information and to take such other precautions as may be reasonable to
insure the identity to be that stated. A genuine grower's declaration of
variety shall affirm that the grower holds records of proof concerning
parent seed, such as invoice and labels.
                                             
 III. The provisions of RSA 433:3 and 4 shall not apply to tree seed
produced by the consumer or sellers of less than 25 pounds of fruit,
flower, or vegetable seeds per year.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990. 2014, 58:2, eff. July 26,
2014.

### Section 433:7

 **433:7 Duties and Authority of Commissioner; Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food shall
administer and enforce this subdivision. The commissioner, through his
authorized agents, shall:
                                             
 (a) Sample, inspect, make analysis of, and test seeds subject to
the provisions of this subdivision that are transported, sold or offered
or exposed for sale within the state for sowing purposes, at such time
and place and to such extent as he may deem necessary to determine
whether the seeds are in compliance with this subdivision, and to notify
promptly the person who sold, offered or exposed the seed for sale and,
if appropriate, the person who labeled or transported the seed, of any
violation, stop sale order or seizure.
                                             
 (b) Cooperate with the United States Department of Agriculture
and other agencies in seed law enforcement.
                                             
 II. The commissioner, individually or through his authorized agents,
may:
                                             
 (a) Enter upon any public or private premises during regular
business hours in order to have access to seeds and the records
connected with the seeds subject to this subdivision, and any truck or
other conveyor by land, water, or air at any time when the conveyor is
accessible, for the same purpose.
                                             
 (b) Issue and enforce a written or printed stop sale order to the
owner or custodian of any lot of seed subject to the provisions of this
subdivision which the commissioner finds is in violation of this
subdivision or rules adopted under it, which order shall prohibit
further sale, processing and movement of such seed, except on approval
of the enforcing officer, until such officer has evidence that the law
has been complied with, and he has issued a release from the stop sale
order of such seed. In respect to seed which has been denied sale,
processing and movement as provided in this subparagraph, the owner or
custodian of such seed shall have the right to appeal from said order to
a court of competent jurisdiction in the locality in which the seeds are
found, requesting a judgment as to the justification of such order and
for the discharge of such seeds from the order prohibiting the sale,
processing and movement in accordance with the findings of the court,
provided that the provisions of this subparagraph shall not be construed
as limiting the right of the enforcement officer to proceed as
authorized by other provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 (c) Establish and maintain or make provisions for seed testing
services, employ qualified persons, and incur such expenses as may be
necessary to comply with these provisions.
                                             
 (d) Make or provide for making purity and germination tests of
seed for farmers and dealers on request, and to fix and collect charges
for the tests made.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative
to:
                                             
 (a) Governing the method of sampling, inspecting, analyzing,
testing and examining seeds subject to this subdivision and the
tolerances to be used.
                                             
 (b) A prohibited and restricted noxious weed seed list, and the
allowable number of such seeds per pound, in accordance with RSA 433:4,
I(e).
                                             
 (c) Reasonable standards of germination for vegetable seeds and
flower seeds.
                                             
 (d) Labeling flower seeds in respect to kind and variety or type
and performance characteristics as required by RSA 433:2.
                                             
 (e) A list of the kinds of flower seeds subject to the flower
seed germination labeling requirements of RSA 433:2.
                                             
 (f) A list of tree and shrub seed species subject to germination
labeling requirements of RSA 433:3, II(g).
                                             
 (g) Methods of determining what constitutes inert matter.
                                             
 (h) Methods of determining what constitutes pure seed.
                                             
 (i) The kinds of agricultural seeds generally labeled as to
variety, as provided in RSA 433:2, II(a).
                                             
 (j) The conditions under which agricultural or vegetable seeds
shall be packaged, as provided in RSA 433:4, I.
                                             
 (k) Purity and germination tests of seeds for farmers and dealers
on request.
                                             
 (l) Seed labeling license standards and procedures, including,
but not limited to, application forms and fees.
                                             
 (m) The enforcement of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:8

 **433:8 Seizure. –** Any lot of seed not in compliance with the
provisions of this subdivision shall be subject to seizure on complaint
of the commissioner to a court of competent jurisdiction in the locality
in which the seed is located. If the court finds the seed to be in
violation of this subdivision and orders the condemnation of said seed,
it shall be denatured, processed, destroyed, relabeled, or otherwise
disposed of in compliance with the laws of this state, provided that in
no instance shall the court order such disposition of said seed without
first having given the claimant an opportunity to apply to the court for
the release of said seed or permission to process or relabel it to meet
the requirements of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 433:9

 **433:9 Injunction. –** When, in the performance of his duties, the
commissioner applies to any court for a temporary or permanent
injunction restraining any person from violating or continuing to
violate any of the provisions of this subdivision or any rules adopted
under this subdivision, the injunction shall be issued without bond.

**Source.** 1990, 126:2, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 433:9-a

 **433:9-a Licensing Requirements. –** No person shall label
agricultural, vegetable, flower, and tree and shrub seeds for planting
purposes for distribution or sale in this state without first having
obtained a seed labeling license. The license application shall be
submitted on forms furnished by the commissioner and shall be
accompanied by the license fee as prescribed by the commissioner.
Sellers of less than 25 pounds of fruit, flower, or vegetable seeds per
year shall be exempt from the licensure requirements of this section.

**Source.** 1990, 126:3, eff. June 18, 1990. 2014, 58:1, eff. July 26,
2014.

### Section 433:9-b

 **433:9-b Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, violates
any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1990, 126:3, eff. June 18, 1990

Certification
-------------

### Section 433:10

 **433:10 Definition. –** The term "certified plants'' and the term
"certified seeds'' used in this subdivision shall mean any variety of
horticultural or agronomic plants or seeds that have been inspected by
the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food or his authorized
agent and found to be reasonably free from disease and true to name as
specified in rules adopted by the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food under the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:11

 **433:11 Application for Inspection. –** Any grower of plants or
seeds approved by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may
make application to the commissioner for inspection and certification of
his plant or seed crop under such rules as the commissioner may adopt
under RSA 541-A. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food or
his authorized agent shall issue such certificates of inspection and
designate or provide such official tags for marking certified plants or
certified seeds and establish such standards of grade and quality as are
necessary to safeguard the privileges and services provided for in this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:12

 **433:12 Acceptance for Certification. –** Any variety of plant or
seed entered for certification must first be approved by a plant and
seed certification board, appointed by the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food with the approval of the advisory board of the
department.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:13

 **433:13 Prohibitions. –** No person in connection with the sale of
plants or seeds shall use the term "certified'' or any similar term
which may tend to convey that the same have been certified under RSA
433:11, either orally or on tags, containers or labels or in advertising
unless said plants or seeds have been inspected and certified under RSA
433:11.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 433:14

 **433:14 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food is hereby authorized to adopt all necessary rules and to
establish such fees as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:15

 **433:15 Penalties. –** Any person, partnership, association or
corporation, and any officer, agent, servant or employee thereof
violating any of the provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor for each offense. If any such person, partnership,
association or corporation shall be twice convicted of a violation of
this subdivision, the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may
prohibit him from marketing certified plants or seeds for a period of
not less than 2 nor more than 4 years after such prohibition.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

Certification of Seed Potatoes
------------------------------

### Section 433:16

 **433:16 Definition. –** The term "certified seed potatoes'' as used
in this subdivision shall include potatoes (Solanum tuberosum) that have
been inspected and tested by the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food or his authorized agents and found to be reasonably free from
disease and other defects, as specified in the rules adopted by the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food under the provisions of
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:17

 **433:17 Application for Inspection. –** Any grower of potatoes in
New Hampshire may make application to the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food for inspection and certification of his potato crop
for seed purposes, under such rules as the commissioner may adopt. The
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food or his authorized agents
shall issue such certificates of inspection, and designate or provide
such official tags for marking containers of certified seed and
establish such standards of grade and quality as are necessary to
safeguard the privileges and service provided for in this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:18

 **433:18 Prohibitions. –** No person, in connection with the sale of
seed potatoes, shall use the term "certified'' or any similar term which
may tend to convey that the same has been certified under this
subdivision, either orally or on tags, containers, or labels or in
advertising unless said seed potatoes have been inspected and certified
under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 433:19

 **433:19 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food is hereby authorized to adopt all necessary rules to carry out
the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 433:20

 **433:20 Penalties. –** Any person, partnership, association or
corporation, and any officer, agency, servant or employee thereof,
violating any of the provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor for each offense. If any such person, partnership,
association, or corporation shall be twice convicted of a violation of
this subdivision, the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may
prohibit him from marketing certified seed potatoes for a period of not
less than 2 nor more than 4 years after such prohibition.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

Nurseries and Nursery Stock
---------------------------

### Section 433:21

 **433:21 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Certificate'' means a document indicating that plant stock has
been inspected and found to be apparently free from dangerous insects
and plant diseases.
                                             
 II. "Certified stock'' means nursery stock derived from a licensed
nursery or certified by a nursery inspector.
                                             
 III. "Collected plants'' means plants and plant parts defined as
nursery stock, which are dug or otherwise removed from fields, woodlots,
or forested lands for sale or distribution, which have not been grown
under cultivation in a nursery for a year.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the New Hampshire
department of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the New Hampshire department of agriculture,
markets, and food.
                                             
 VI. "Director'' means the state entomologist, qualified by
scientific training and practical experience, directly answerable to the
commissioner, in charge of and responsible for the activities of the
division of plant industry.
                                             
 VII. "Division'' means the division of plant industry of the New
Hampshire department of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 VIII. "Eradication'' means the elimination or removal of a pest from
any defined geographic area.
                                             
 IX. "Greenhouse'' means a structure covered with glass, plastic,
fiberglass, or other material in which plants are cultivated in a
controlled environment.
                                             
 X. "Horticultural services'' means any arborist, landscape
architect, or gardening consultant whose function is that of providing
services relative to horticulture.
                                             
 XI. "License'' means an authorization from the director to sell
plant stock.
                                             
 XII. "Nursery'' means a place or greenhouse where nursery stock is
propagated, grown, stored, cultivated, or offered for sale.
                                             
 XIII. "Nursery inspectors'' means persons either full-time employees
of the division or knowledgeable individuals hired on a part-time basis
to conduct the work of the division.
                                             
 XIV. "Nurseryman'' means a person who owns, leases, manages, or is
in charge of a nursery. All persons engaged in operating a nursery are
farming within the meaning of RSA 21:34-a.
                                             
 XV. "Nursery stock'' means woody plants, including ornamental and
fruiting trees, shrubs, vines, and all viable parts of these plants;
herbaceous plants, including florist stock plants, annuals, perennials,
vegetable plants, herbs, potted plants, and all viable parts of these
plants; and any other plant or plant part designated by the
commissioner. Nursery stock does not include cut Christmas trees,
wreaths, seeds, dried herbs, vegetables, cut flowers, or such plant
products.
                                             
 XVI. "Plant dealer'' means any person, firm, partnership,
association, or corporation not a grower or an original producer of
nursery stock in New Hampshire who buys or acquires, or receives on
consignment nursery stock for the purposes of re-selling, transporting,
or otherwise disposing of the stock.
                                             
 XVII. "Plant diseases'' means fungi, bacteria, nematodes, viruses,
and plant parasites injurious to plants and plant products.
                                             
 XVIII. "Plant pests'' means any organism, including other plants,
causing or capable of causing injury or damage to plants or plant
products.
                                             
 XIX. "Public nuisance'' means a plant pest determined by the
department to be dangerous or destructive to the agriculture or
horticulture of New Hampshire.
                                             
 XX. "Quarantine'' means a legal action intended to prevent or delay
the establishment of a pest of plants or crops.
                                             
 XXI. "Soil'' means the medium designated for plant propagation.
                                             
 XXII. "Stop sale order'' means a written notice issued by an
inspector to the owner or custodian of any plant or plant products,
which prohibits the sale or movement of plants or plant products.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995. 2002, 7:1, Mar.
12, 2002.

### Section 433:22

 **433:22 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner shall adopt
rules under RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. The issuing of orders under the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The issuing of licenses as may be necessary.
                                             
 III. Establishing fees for certificates and licenses issued under
this subdivision, as well as any publications printed for distribution
to the general public.
                                             
 IV. The collection of fees under this subdivision.
                                             
 V. The printing, publishing, posting and distribution of reports
made available to the public.
                                             
 VI. Quarantine measures that may be taken when pests are found in
any geographic area.
                                             
 VII. Reasonable rules as may be needed to carry out and enforce the
provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:2, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:23

 **433:23 Certified Stock. –** All nursery stock shipped into New
Hampshire shall bear on each consignment or package a valid license or
certificate number indicating that the contents of that consignment or
package have been inspected by a duly authorized inspecting officer, and
that the contents are apparently free from all dangerous insects and
plant diseases, and are therefore certified stock.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:3, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:24

 **433:24 Cooperative Agreements; Grants-in-Aid. –** The department
is authorized to cooperate, receive grants-in-aid, and enter into
agreements with any individual, organization, or county, state or
federal agency for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this
subdivision. The department may also enforce any federal quarantine or
regulation promulgated under federal quarantine within the state of New
Hampshire.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 433:25

 **433:25 Fees. –** The commissioner may establish reasonable fees
pursuant to RSA 433:22, III.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 433:26

 **433:26 Director. –** The director may hire such nursery inspectors
as he may deem necessary within his budgetary limitations.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 433:27

 **433:27 Regulation of Horticultural Services. –** Any person
engaged in horticultural services shall be subject to regulation by the
commissioner under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:4, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:28

 **433:28 Nursery Stock Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Woody-stemmed deciduous nursery stock shall have moist green
cambium tissue in the stem or stems and branches, and shall have viable
buds or normal green, rigid growth. Growth shall be sufficient to permit
the stock to live and grow in a form characteristic of the species when
planted and given reasonable care. Nursery stock which does not meet
those standards shall not be sold or offered for sale.
                                             
 II. Hardy herbaceous biennials or perennials, when in a wilted,
rotted, or other such condition indicative of subnormal vitality, shall
not be sold or offered for sale.
                                             
 III. Any bare-rooted or prepackaged woody-stemmed nursery stock
having more than 2 inches of etiolated (nongreen) growth from individual
buds shall not be sold or offered for sale.
                                             
 IV. Balled and burlapped or containerized nursery stock in a
weakened condition as evidenced by die-back or dryness of foliage shall
not be sold or offered for sale.
                                             
 V. Nursery stock infected with plant diseases or infested with plant
pests shall not be offered for sale or given away.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:5, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:29

 **433:29 Nursery Inspection. –** A nursery inspector shall inspect
any nursery as determined necessary by the director. Nurseries shall be
accessible at reasonable times for inspection. Nursery inspectors shall
verify that nursery stock requirements are in compliance with RSA
433:28.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:6, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:29-a

 **433:29-a License Required. –** A person, firm, or corporation may
not engage in or continue in the business of selling nursery stock
without first obtaining a license to conduct such business in the state.
Licenses are non-transferable and each business shall possess a valid
license for each business location.

**Source.** 2002, 7:7, eff. Mar. 12, 2002.

### Section 433:30

 **433:30 Diseased, Infested Stock; Stop Sale, Destruction. –**
                                             
 I. Only sound, healthy nursery stock, which will maintain its vigor,
shall be offered for sale. The offering for sale of stock which is
infected with diseases or infested with plant pests is a violation of
this subdivision. Whenever the director has reason to believe that any
nursery or plant dealer in the state has introduced or is offering for
sale diseased or infested stock, the director or a nursery inspector
shall inspect that stock. If, upon inspection, the director or a nursery
inspector finds any such stock, the inspector may order the plants,
either individually or in blocks, to be:
                                             
 (a) Made subject to a stop sale order.
                                             
 (b) Treated by the nurseryman.
                                             
 (c) Destroyed according to the nursery inspector's instructions.
                                             
 II. Plants ordered destroyed or subject to a stop sale order must be
clearly separable from noninfested stock. Any order must be confirmed in
writing within 7 days or clearly marked on the inspection report. The
order shall include the reason for action, a description of the nursery
stock affected, and any recommended treatment. Destruction of condemned
stock shall be at the expense of the owner. Stop sale tags may not be
removed except by written permission of the director or upon suitable
disposal of the infested plants.
                                             
 III. A person issued any order under paragraph I may appeal that
order by letter to the commissioner within 15 days after receiving the
order. The letter shall state any grounds for appealing and designate
the plants affected.
                                             
 IV. A nursery inspector shall reinspect a nursery or plant dealer as
determined necessary by the director. If the nursery or plant dealer is
still in violation of the requirements and despite the inspector's
efforts, a stop sale shall be implemented and the nursery or plant
dealer license revoked. After further inspection, the director may
reinstate the nursery or plant dealer license.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:8, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:31

 **433:31 Lack of Certificate. –** If nursery stock is brought into
the state without a certificate of inspection, or notification of
licensure, the consignee shall return it to the consignor at the expense
of the consignor, or shall call the director to inspect the nursery
stock.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:9, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:32

 **433:32 Prohibitions; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. The following actions are prohibited:
                                             
 (a) Selling, distributing, receiving, or delivering nursery stock
which has not been licensed or certified.
                                             
 (b) Using a nursery or plant dealer license after it has been
revoked or suspended or has expired.
                                             
 (c) Offering any hindrance or resistance to the carrying out of
the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 (d) Knowingly permitting any plant pest declared a public
nuisance to exist on his or her premises or selling, offering for sale,
giving away or moving any plants, plant products, or other material
capable of harboring the pest.
                                             
 II. Any person or employee or agent of that person, who violates any
provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision,
shall be guilty of a violation. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or
any rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in
addition, be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for
each violation, which may be collected in a civil action or in
connection with an action for injunctive relief brought by the attorney
general.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule or order of the commissioner shall be subject to the imposition of
an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:10, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:33

 **433:33 Right of Entry. –** The commissioner, director, and nursery
inspectors shall at all times have the right to enter any public or
private grounds in the performance of any duty under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 433:34

 **433:34 Quarantine. –** The commissioner may establish quarantines
as specified in the law or under the rules to prevent dissemination of
plant pests within the state. When any pests that have the potential to
cause serious damage to agriculture are found in any geographic area,
that area and any adjacent areas shall be quarantined. After a
quarantine is established, the commissioner shall adopt any rules
necessary to prevent or reduce the movement of that pest from the
quarantined area and may implement any limitation or treatment measures
necessary for the containment or eradication of that pest.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:11, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:35

 **433:35 Suspension of License. –** The director may at any time
suspend a license issued under the provisions of RSA 433:29-a if
dangerous insect or plant disease pests are found upon the premises,
either on the plants or in the soil, and shall not reinstate the license
until such time as such pests have been suppressed or eradicated.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2002, 7:12, eff. Mar. 12,
2002.

### Section 433:36

 **433:36 Prosecution. –** Any person violating the provisions of
this subdivision shall be prosecuted by the office of the attorney
general.

**Source.** 1985, 33:1, eff. July 1, 1985.
