---
title: CHAPTER 434 MARKETING AND GRADING OF CERTAIN COMMODITIES
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 434
                                             
MARKETING AND GRADING OF CERTAIN COMMODITIES
--------------------------------------------

Farm Produce
------------

### Section 434:1

 **434:1 Standard Boxes. –** Farm produce may be sold in or shipped
from New Hampshire at either wholesale or retail in standard boxes, in
original or unbroken form, and such standard boxes shall contain
2,162.89 cubic inches and shall be of the following dimensions by inside
measurements: 17- 1/2 inches in length by 17- 1/2 inches in width and 7-
1/16 inches in depth. The New Hampshire standard half-box for farm
produce shall contain 1,081.55 cubic inches and shall be of the
following dimensions by inside measurements: 12- 3/8 inches in length by
12- 3/8 inches in width and 7- 1/16 inches in depth. When the above
specified boxes are made of wood, the ends shall not be less than 5/8 of
an inch and the sides and bottom not less than 3/8 of an inch in
thickness. All such boxes and half-boxes of the dimensions specified
herein shall be marked on at least one outer side in bold, uncondensed
capital letters, not less than one inch in height: "Standard Box Farm
Produce'' and "Standard Half-Box Farm Produce,'' respectively. Except as
above provided, farm produce shall be sold at wholesale or retail by
avoirdupois weight, measure or numerical count.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:2

 **434:2 Penalty. –** Whoever represents, by marking or otherwise,
any box or half-box to be a standard box or standard half-box for the
sale of farm produce, unless it conforms to the foregoing requirements,
shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:3

 **434:3 Enforcement of Provision. –** The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food shall enforce the provisions of RSA
434:1.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

Cord Wood and Bark
------------------

### Section 434:4

 **434:4 Cord Dimensions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 47:1, I, eff. June 18,
1989.
                                             ]

### Section 434:5

 **434:5 Measures. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 47:1, II, eff. June 18,
1989.
                                             ]

### Section 434:6

 **434:6 Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 47:1, III, eff. June 18,
1989.
                                             ]

Ice
---

### Section 434:7

 **434:7 Weighing, by Dealer. –** A dealer in ice who, on request of
the purchaser, refuses or neglects to weigh the same when delivered, or
gives a false weight, shall be fined not more than 
                                             $50.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:8

 **434:8 Delivery From Vehicle. –** Whoever, having charge of the
delivery of ice from a wagon, not being a dealer in ice, refuses to
weigh the same on the request of the purchaser when it is delivered, or
gives a false weight, shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Coal
----

### Section 434:9

 **434:9 Standards. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food shall fix reasonable standards with respect to the amount of bone,
slate, or other foreign substances which may be contained in anthracite
coal or coke sold as standard coal or coke within this state. Such
standards shall be set forth in an order or orders, and shall take
effect at such time as shall be stated therein and remain in force until
modified by the commissioner. In fixing such standards, due regard shall
be had for the custom of the trade as carried on by reputable dealers,
and the orders of the commissioner shall be designed to protect the
public from imposition.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:10

 **434:10 Sales. –** No person shall offer for sale any anthracite
coal or coke which does not comply with the standards fixed in
accordance with RSA 434:9 without first notifying the purchaser of the
character and quality of the coal or coke sold or offered for sale, and
that the same does not comply with such standards.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Grading and Marking Potatoes
----------------------------

### Section 434:11

 **434:11 Application of Law. –** The provisions of this subdivision
shall apply to all shipments, packages, containers, or displays in which
potatoes are packed, distributed, sold, offered or exposed for sale
except as herein otherwise provided.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:12

 **434:12 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. The word "persons'' as used in this subdivision shall include
individuals, corporations, companies, societies and associations. The
act, omission or failure of an officer, agent, or other person acting
for or employed by a corporation, company, society or association,
within the scope of his employment or office, shall also be deemed to be
the act, omission or failure of such corporation, company, society, or
association.
                                             
 II. "Grade'' or "grades'' shall mean the standards for potatoes
established by the United States Department of Agriculture and adopted
by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food as the official
grades on potatoes for New Hampshire under the authority of RSA 426:1.
                                             
 III. "Plainly and conspicuously'' shall mean that the lettering used
to cover information required by law on containers shall be legible
enough so as not to be obscured by other markings or illustrations used.
Printed or stamped terms shall be 3/8 inch or larger in height.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:13

 **434:13 Marks on Containers. –** Every shipment, package, or
container containing potatoes which are packed, sold, distributed,
offered or exposed for sale or distribution in the state by any person
shall be plainly and conspicuously marked with the name and address of
the packer, or the person by whose authority the potatoes are packed or
distributed, and the proper grade of the potatoes contained therein. The
party possessing the potatoes at any time shall be deemed responsible
for the proper marking of the potatoes. On display racks or bins from
which potatoes are sold in retail quantities, the proper grade shall be
plainly and conspicuously shown, but the provision as to markings of
name and address or person by whose authority the potatoes were packed
shall not apply.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:14

 **434:14 Exemptions. –** Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to prevent a grower from selling potatoes at his premises or
his storage or delivering potatoes to a central packing house,
processing plant, or storage without such marking, except that any
potatoes displayed or offered for sale at the roadside shall be marked
with the proper grade. Properly tagged certified seed potatoes are
exempted from the provisions hereof.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:14-a

 **434:14-a Stop Sale, Use or Removal Orders. –** When the
commissioner or his authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe
potatoes are being distributed in violation of any of the provisions of
this subdivision, or of any of the rules adopted under this subdivision,
he may issue and serve a written "stop sale, use or removal'' order upon
the owner or custodian of any such potatoes. The potatoes shall not be
sold, used or removed until the provisions of this subdivision have been
complied with and the potatoes have been released by the commissioner or
the violation has been otherwise disposed of as provided in this
subdivision by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1985, 34:2, eff. June 8, 1985.

### Section 434:15

 **434:15 Advertising. –** All advertising of potatoes in which the
price is given shall state the grade or grades of potatoes being
advertised.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 31:1, eff. June 11, 1989.

### Section 434:16

 **434:16 Enforcement; Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food shall enforce all of the provisions of
this subdivision. He, either in person or by a duly authorized
representative, shall have free access, ingress and egress during
business hours to any place or any building where potatoes are packed,
stored, transported, sold, offered or exposed for sale or for
transportation. He may also, in person or by duly authorized
representative, open any box, barrel, or other container and examine its
contents, and may, upon tendering the market price, take samples
therefrom. The commissioner shall adopt rules for carrying out the
provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:17

 **434:17 Hearings. –** When the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food learns of any violation of any of the provisions of
this subdivision, he may cause notice of such violation together with
the copy of his findings to be given the person or persons concerned.
Persons so notified shall be afforded a hearing under rules adopted by
the commissioner, under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:8. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:18

 **434:18 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, violates
any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:9, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

Apples
------

### Section 434:19

 **434:19 Official Grades. –** The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, establishing
official grades of apples packed or repacked within the state, and may
from time to time by rule amend or modify such grades. Before
establishing, amending or modifying any such grades, the commissioner
shall consult with growers and shippers of apples relative to proposed
grades, or, upon written petition of 10 or more growers producing
annually an aggregate of not less than 100,000 bushels of apples, the
commissioner shall, after reasonable notice specifying the date, place
and purpose of the proposed hearing, hold a public hearing for the
purpose of obtaining information with a view to establishing or amending
or modifying as the case may be, such official grades. The grades so
established shall include grades identical in name and requirements with
all grades or standards of apples as promulgated from time to time by
the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States and commonly known as
the United States grades. The commissioner may, in an emergency and
after consultation with representative growers, establish temporary
grades, without holding a public hearing, but he shall indicate the
period for which such temporary grades will be in effect. Apples not
conforming to official grades, or, if conforming, not branded in
accordance therewith, shall be considered "unclassified'' and so
branded. Each package shall be packed so that the apples in the shown
face shall be reasonably representative in size, color and quality of
the contents of the package.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:20

 **434:20 Other Designations Forbidden. –** The marks indicating the
grade as described in RSA 434:19 shall not be accompanied by any other
designation of grade or brand which is inconsistent with the marks
required by RSA 434:23.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:21

 **434:21 Minimum Size; Term Defined. –** The minimum size of all
apples in all grades, except unclassified apples as defined in RSA
434:19, shall be marked upon the package and shall be determined by
taking the transverse diameter of the smallest fruit in the package at
right angles to the stem and blossom ends. Minimum sizes shall be stated
in variations of 1/8 of an inch, such as 2 inches, 2- 1/8 inches, 2- 1/4
inches and so forth, in accordance with the facts.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:22

 **434:22 Exception. –** If apples are packed in diagonal, layer,
cells, trays, or other count type packages the number of apples may be
stated in place of the minimum size.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:23

 **434:23 Certain Information to be Marked on Packages. –** Each
package of apples packed or repacked within the state and intended for
sale within or without the state shall be marked or branded except as
otherwise provided at the time of packing, repacking or closing with a
statement of (a) the quantity of the contents, (b) the name and address
of the person by whose authority the apples were packed, (c) the true
name of the variety, (d) the official grade or the term "unclassified'',
and (e) the minimum size or count of the apples contained therein in
accordance with RSA 434:19, 21 and 22; except that when offered for sale
at retail only the variety, grade and size or count need to be so marked
and one sign giving this information, prominently displayed with the
apples so offered, may be substituted for the statements otherwise
required for individual packages. If the true name of the variety is not
known to the packer or other person by whose authority the apples are
packed, the statement shall include the words "variety unknown''. If
apples are repacked, the package shall bear the name and address of the
person by whose authority it is repacked in place of that of the person
by whose authority it was originally packed.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:24

 **434:24 Special Closed Packages. –** Notwithstanding the provisions
of RSA 434:23, the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may,
by authorization of the agricultural advisory board and after public
hearing, adopt rules as to the information to be marked on packages of
apples enclosed in sealed bags or containers made of transparent
material.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:25

 **434:25 Sales Advertisements. –** All sales advertisements by
radio, television, newspaper, or other medium, open bulk display signs,
and printed sales statements shall state the variety, official grade,
size of apples, or the term "unclassified'' whenever the price is shown,
stated or written in connection with the sale of apples.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:26

 **434:26 Controlled Atmosphere. –** No person shall sell or exchange
or offer or expose for sale or exchange or transport for sale any apples
represented as having been exposed to "controlled atmosphere'',
"modified atmosphere'', alone or with other words, or shall so use any
such term or form of words or symbols of similar import on any container
or lot of apples advertised, sold, offered for sale or transported for
sale within this state unless such apples have been kept in a room or
storage building with not more than 5 percent oxygen for a minimum of 60
days. A record on a form approved by the commissioner shall be kept at a
convenient location adjacent to the room or storage building from the
day of sealing to the day of opening of the room or storage building,
and shall be subject to review by the commissioner or the commissioner's
authorized agents at any time for a period of at least one year.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1997, 136:1, eff. June 9, 1997.

### Section 434:27

 **434:27 Markings. –** All markings shall be conspicuous, clear and
legible.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:28

 **434:28 Misbranded Apples; Term Defined. –** For the purpose of
this subdivision, sales advertisements or any package of apples packed
or repacked within or without the state shall be deemed to be misbranded
unless conforming to the requirements of the preceding sections of this
subdivision, or to rules adopted by the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food; provided that no package shall bear any statement,
design or device regarding such article or its contents which in any
particular shall be false or misleading or falsely branded.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:28-a

 **434:28-a Stop Sale, Use or Removal Orders. –** When the
commissioner or his authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe
apples are being distributed in violation of any of the provisions of
this subdivision, or of any of the rules adopted under this subdivision,
he may issue and serve a written "stop sale, use or removal'' order upon
the owner or custodian of any such apples. The apples shall not be sold,
used or removed until the provisions of this subdivision have been
complied with and the apples have been released by the commissioner or
the violation has been otherwise disposed of as provided in this
subdivision by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1985, 34:1, eff. June 8, 1985.

### Section 434:29

 **434:29 Administrative Authority. –** The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food shall adopt rules for carrying out the
provisions of this subdivision. He shall, in person or by his deputy or
agent, have free access at all reasonable hours to any place, building,
or vehicle in which apples are packed, stored, sold, offered, or exposed
for sale or held for transportation. He shall also have power, in person
or by his deputy or agent, to open any box, barrel, or other container
and may, upon tendering the market price, take such container and its
contents or samples therefrom. He shall have general authority to
administer and enforce the provisions of this subdivision and the rules
adopted under this subdivision, and to prosecute violations thereof.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:30

 **434:30 Hearings. –** When the commissioner learns of any violation
of any provision of this subdivision he shall cause notice of such
violation, together with a copy of the findings, to be given to the
person or persons concerned. Persons so notified shall be afforded a
hearing under rules adopted by the commissioner, under RSA 541-A.
Affidavits under oath may be received by the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:10. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:31

 **434:31 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, violates
any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 434:32

 **434:32 Interpretation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 114:6, III, eff. July
1, 2012.
                                             ]

Apple Marketing
---------------

### Section 434:33

 **434:33 Definitions. –** As used in this subdivision:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food.
                                             
 III. "Distributor'' means any person engaged within this state in
selling, offering for sale, marketing or distributing apples which he
has purchased or acquired from a producer or other person or which he is
marketing on behalf of a producer or other person, whether as owner,
agent, employee, broker or otherwise, but shall not include a retailer,
except such retailer who purchases or acquires from, or handles on
behalf of any producer or other person, apples subject to regulation by
the marketing agreement or order covering apples.
                                             
 IV. "Handler'' means any person engaged in the operation of packing,
grading, selling, offering for sale or marketing any marketable apples,
who as owner, agent or otherwise ships or causes apples to be shipped.
                                             
 V. "Marketing agreement'' means an agreement entered into, with the
approval of the commissioner, by producers with distributors, processors
and handlers regulating the preparation, sale and handling of apples.
                                             
 VI. "Marketing order'' means an order issued by the commissioner
pursuant to this subdivision governing the marketing for processing, the
distributing, the sale of, or the handling in any manner of any apples
sold in this state during any specified period.
                                             
 VII. "Processor'' means any person engaged within this state in
processing, or in the operation of receiving, grading, packing, canning,
freezing, dehydrating, fermenting, distilling, extracting, preserving,
grinding, crushing, or in any other way preserving or changing the form
of apples for the purpose of marketing apples, but shall not include a
person engaged in manufacturing another and different product from
apples.
                                             
 VIII. "Producer'' means any person engaged within this state in the
business of producing, or causing to be produced, for any market 500
bushels or more of apples.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995. 2010, 368:28,
VIII, eff. Dec. 31, 2010.

### Section 434:34

 **434:34 Powers and Duties of the Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall, after due notice and hearing, approve
marketing agreements, which shall thereupon only be binding upon the
signatories thereto.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may make and issue marketing orders, after due
notice and opportunity for hearing, subject to the provisions of
paragraph III.
                                             
 III. No marketing order under this subdivision shall take effect
unless and until the producers, through a referendum conducted by the
commissioner, indicate its adoption is favored by:
                                             
 (a) Not less than 66- 2/3 percent of the producers participating
in the referendum; or
                                             
 (b) Not less than 65 percent of the producers who have marketed
more than 50 percent of the total quantity of the apples which were
marketed in the next preceding marketing season by all producers that
voted in the referendum; or
                                             
 (c) More than 50 percent of the producers who have marketed not
less than 65 percent of the total quantity of the apples in the next
preceding marketing season by all producers that voted in the
referendum.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner, upon written petition duly signed by 25
percent of the producers in the state, shall amend or terminate such
order after due notice and opportunity for hearing, but subject to the
approval of not less than 50 percent of such producers participating in
a referendum vote.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall administer and enforce any marketing order
while the order is in effect, to:
                                             
 (a) Encourage and maintain stable prices received by producers
for apples at a level which is consistent with the provisions and aims
of this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) Prevent the unreasonable or unnecessary waste of agricultural
wealth.
                                             
 (c) Protect the interests of consumers of apples, to such extent
as is deemed to be necessary under the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 (d) Prepare a budget for the administration and operating costs
and expenses, including advertising and sales promotion when required in
any marketing agreement or order executed hereunder, and to provide for
the collection of such necessary fees to defray such costs and expenses,
in no case to exceed 5 percent of the gross dollar volume of sales or
dollar volume of purchases or amounts handled, to be collected from each
person engaged in the production, processing, distributing or the
handling of apples produced in this state and directly affected by any
marketing order issued pursuant to this subdivision for apples.
                                             
 (e) Cooperate with the legally constituted authorities
responsible for apple production, distribution and sales in the other
states and the federal government.
                                             
 VI. Any marketing agreement or order issued by the commissioner
pursuant to this subdivision may contain any or all of the following:
                                             
 (a) Establishment of uniform grading, standards and inspection of
apples.
                                             
 (b) Establishment of research programs designed to benefit apples
or New Hampshire agriculture in general.
                                             
 (c) Provisions for the establishment of an adequate system for
estimating total season crop and future potential crops.
                                             
 (d) Provisions for determining the growing, handling and
marketing conditions of apples.
                                             
 (e) Provisions for contracting with appropriate parties for
promotion, paid advertising and other publicity for apples.
                                             
 (f) Such rules adopted in accordance with RSA 541-A that may be
necessary to effect a marketing agreement or order.
                                             
 (g) The penalties to be imposed for failure to comply with a
marketing agreement or order.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner may temporarily suspend the operation of an
effective marketing order for a continuing period of not longer than one
growing and marketing season if the purposes of this subdivision are
deemed unnecessary during such season.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall take into consideration in determining
whether or not to issue a marketing agreement or marketing order the
following economic factors:
                                             
 (a) The quantity of apples available for distribution.
                                             
 (b) The quantity of apples normally required by consumers.
                                             
 (c) The cost of producing apples.
                                             
 (d) The purchasing power of consumers.
                                             
 (e) The level of prices of commodities, services and articles
which the farmers commonly buy.
                                             
 (f) The level of prices of other commodities which compete with
or are utilized as substitutes for apples.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:35

 **434:35 Marketing Agreements and Marketing Orders; Not Concurrent.
–**
                                             
 I. The execution of any marketing agreement shall in no manner
affect the issuance, administration or enforcement of any marketing
order provided for in this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may issue such marketing order without
executing a marketing agreement or may execute a marketing agreement
without issuing a marketing order covering apples.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, in his discretion, may hold a concurrent
hearing upon a proposed marketing agreement and a proposed marketing
order in the manner provided for giving due notice and opportunity for
hearing for a marketing order as provided in this subdivision.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall require the applicants petitioning for
the issuance, amendment or termination of any marketing order to deposit
with the commissioner such amount of money as he deems to be necessary
to defray the expenses of preparing, amending or terminating a marketing
order.
                                             
 V. In the event the marketing order is adopted, amended or
terminated by the producers participating in the referendum provided for
in RSA 434:34, III, the commissioner shall reimburse to such applicant
any unexpended moneys collected as a deposit pursuant to paragraph IV.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:36

 **434:36 Marketing Fund. –** All fees collected by the commissioner
under this subdivision shall be deposited with the state treasurer to be
used solely for the purposes of this subdivision. The state treasurer
shall establish a separate, nonlapsing account to be known as the apple
marketing account. The moneys in the apple marketing account are hereby
appropriated to the commissioner, department of agriculture, markets,
and food, to be expended for the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:37

 **434:37 Gifts and Donations. –** The commissioner may accept
grants, gifts and donations to further the purpose of any statewide
marketing order. Such sums shall be deposited in the apple marketing
account established by RSA 434:36.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:38

 **434:38 Advisory Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(30), eff. Dec.
31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 434:39

 **434:39 Hearings. –** The commissioner may call for hearings as
required by this subdivision by giving interested parties 10 days'
notice which states the time, place and purpose of the scheduled
hearing.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:40

 **434:40 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt under RSA
541-A such rules as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Cider
-----

### Section 434:40-a

 **434:40-a Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Cider'' means the unfermented juice of apples.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means any individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, association, cooperative, business trust, or legal entity
of any kind.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:40-b

 **434:40-b Manufacture and Sale. –** The commissioner may adopt
rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the manufacture, blending,
labeling, and sale of cider in New Hampshire. Such rules shall be
designed to ensure the following:
                                             
 I. That any cider which is claimed or implied to have been produced
in New Hampshire is in fact produced in New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. That the term "cider'' have a specific commercial definition in
New Hampshire, and that the term's commercial use in New Hampshire be
restricted to the sale of products which fall under that definition.
                                             
 III. That all other terms used in the labeling and sale of cider and
cider blends in New Hampshire be consistent and clear.
                                             
 IV. That any container of cider sold in New Hampshire bears a label
which clearly identifies its producer, and which conspicuously and
accurately describes its contents.
                                             
 V. That unpasteurized cider may be sold within the state if such
cider is clearly labeled as unpasteurized.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1. 2001, 137:2, eff. Aug. 28, 2001.

### Section 434:40-c

 **434:40-c Prohibitions. –** It shall be unlawful in New Hampshire
to manufacture, sell, or distribute cider or any product called "cider''
by any means that violate any of the provisions of this subdivision, or
any of the rules adopted under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 434:40-d

 **434:40-d Administrative Authority; Inspectors; Rulemaking. –** The
commissioner shall have general authority to administer and enforce the
provisions of this subdivision and may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this subdivision. The
commissioner or duly authorized agent shall have free access at all
reasonable hours to any place, building or vehicle in which apple cider
is manufactured, sold, offered, or exposed for sale or exchanged or
distributed at retail or wholesale. The commissioner or duly authorized
agent shall have authority to open any package or container, and may
upon tendering the market price take such container and its contents or
sample from the package or container.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 434:40-e

 **434:40-e Stop Sale, Use or Removal Orders. –** When the
commissioner or duly authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe
cider is being distributed in violation of any of the provisions of this
subdivision, or any of the rules adopted under this subdivision, the
commissioner or duly authorized agent may issue and serve a written
"stop sale, use or removal'' order upon the owner or custodian of any
such cider. The cider shall not be sold, used or removed until the
provisions of this subdivision have been complied with and the cider has
been released by the commissioner or duly authorized agent or the
violation has been otherwise disposed of as provided in this subdivision
by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 434:40-f

 **434:40-f Hearings. –** When the commissioner learns of any
violation of any provision of this subdivision, notice of such
violation, together with a copy of the findings, shall be given to the
person or persons concerned. Persons so notified shall be afforded a
hearing under rules adopted by the commissioner. Affidavits under oath
may be received by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 434:40-g

 **434:40-g Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or rule
adopted under this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any
subsequent offense, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1994, 14:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 434:40-h

 **434:40-h Interpretation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 114:6, IV, eff. July
1, 2012.
                                             ]

Milk Sales
----------

### Section 434:41

 **434:41 License. –** Every person who purchases milk or cream from
producers within this state, to be either resold as milk or cream or
manufactured into other dairy products, shall first obtain a license and
give security in accordance with RSA 434:44 and 45; provided that no
resident person, association or corporation making such purchases and
sales shall be required to give security as long as payment for such
purchases is made on or before the tenth day of each calendar month for
milk and cream purchased and delivered during the first half of the
previous month and on or before the twenty-fifth day of each calendar
month for milk and cream purchased and delivered during the last half of
the previous month; and provided further that satisfactory evidence of
payment is filed with the commissioner on the tenth and twenty-fifth
days of each calendar month; and provided further that any nonresident
person, association or corporation making such purchases and sales shall
not be required to give security as long as payment for such purchases
is made weekly; and provided further that satisfactory evidence of
payment is filed with the commissioner at the time payment is made to
the producer; and provided further that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to a producer-dealer making such purchases from not more
than 2 producers within the state or to a farmer cooperative organized
under the laws of this or any other state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:42

 **434:42 Application. –** Every applicant for a license shall file
with the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food a statement
showing:
                                             
 I. The full name and address of the dealer, if an individual.
                                             
 II. If it is a partnership, the full names and addresses of all
partners, and their respective interests in the firm.
                                             
 III. If it is an association, the full names and addresses of all
members of the association, a copy of the articles of association, a
list of all officers of the association and a copy of any bylaws or
regulations thereof attested by its clerk or secretary.
                                             
 IV. If it is a corporation, a copy of its charter or articles of
agreement, a copy of its bylaws or regulations and a copy of such
portions of its records as show the extent of its paid up capital, a
list of its stockholders and their respective holdings, a list of its
officers and a statement showing its financial condition, all of which
shall be signed by the president, treasurer and secretary or clerk of
the corporation.
                                             
 V. A complete statement of all real estate within this state, owned
by such applicant, and of the incumbrances thereon, which shall also
contain the place and details of the record of the applicant's title to
it.
                                             
 VI. A statement of the amount of such business done by the
applicant, within this state, during each month of the year preceding
such application.
                                             
 VII. Such further information relative to its organization or past
business, or the proposed course of future business, as the commissioner
of agriculture, markets, and food may require.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:43

 **434:43 Power of Attorney as Condition. –** All residents giving
bond, as provided under RSA 434:45, and all nonresidents shall, prior to
receiving such a license, file with the secretary of state a power of
attorney, appointing the secretary the applicant's agent for receiving
service of process, returnable to any court within this state; and shall
also file a copy of such power of attorney with the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:44

 **434:44 Issuance; Renewal. –** Upon the filing of the statement
required by RSA 434:42, power of attorney, if any is required, the
depositing of bond, mortgage or other security, and the payment of a
license fee of 
                                             $20, the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food
shall license such applicant to make such purchases from producers
within the state until the next August 1 if the applicant is found by
the commissioner to have sufficient real estate within the state, or has
filed sufficient other security, for the protection of those from whom
such applicant purchases the aforesaid products. Such license may upon
application be renewed annually on August 1 upon payment of a like fee
and filing of such bond, mortgage or other security as the commissioner
deems necessary.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:45

 **434:45 Security. –** Any applicant not having sufficient real
estate shall be permitted to furnish security by a bond signed by such
applicant and some surety company authorized to do business in the state
or such other security as the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food may approve. The security provided shall be equal to the average
monthly gross value of milk purchased from New Hampshire producers
during the previous calendar year. Bonds or such other security must be
filed with the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food 30 days
prior to the renewal date of the license.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:46

 **434:46 Additional Security. –** The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food may require such licensee to furnish detailed
statements of the business transacted by such licensee; and may require
the licensee to furnish further bond whenever in the opinion of the
commissioner it becomes necessary for the protection of resident
creditors of such licensee.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:47

 **434:47 Selling Realty. –** Any licensee whom the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food has accredited with security consisting
of real estate shall, before conveying or incumbering said real estate,
notify the commissioner and shall comply with such order as to
furnishing bond in lieu of such real estate as he may make before
selling or incumbering said realty.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:48

 **434:48 Powers of Commissioner of Agriculture, Markets, and Food.
–** In administering this subdivision, the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food shall have the power to adopt rules, subpoena and
examine under oath producers, distributors and any other person, their
books, records, documents, correspondence and accounts, as he deems
necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:49

 **434:49 Statements of Quantity. –** At the time payment is made for
purchases of milk or cream, such licensee shall furnish to each payee a
statement of the quantity delivered or furnished by him during the
period covered by the payment so made, together with the price allowed
for the same.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:50

 **434:50 Forfeiture of Security. –** If such licensee for the space
of one day after the date upon which the payment of the several amounts
due his vendors became due fails to pay the amount due for milk or cream
delivered or furnished by such creditor, such licensee shall by reason
of such nonpayment be in default as to all patrons whose accounts shall
then remain unpaid, and the bond or other security provided for under
RSA 434:45 shall be forfeited to the extent of all sums then due from
such licensee to his several patrons in this state. By virtue of such
default the conditions of such bond or other securities shall be deemed
to be broken.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:51

 **434:51 Commissioner To Be Trustee. –** All bonds, mortgages or
other securities required and furnished under the provisions of this
subdivision shall be given to the commissioner as trustee of the person
furnishing the same, for each and all of the patrons in this state, and
shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of such person of all
the acts prescribed for, and all the conditions imposed upon, such
person by this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:52

 **434:52 Proceedings for Recovery. –** Upon breach of the condition
of a bond, mortgage, or other security, the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food may, upon his own motion or upon application by a
patron of a person whose account for products furnished such licensee
remains unpaid as provided under RSA 434:50, institute appropriate
proceedings thereon in his name as trustee for the benefit of all of the
patrons of such licensee in this state to whom such licensee may be
indebted at the time such proceeding is instituted. Such proceedings may
be commenced in any county in this state where a patron of such licensee
resides.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:53

 **434:53 Service on Secretary of State. –** Whenever suit is
instituted upon any such bond, service shall be made upon the secretary
of state, as the resident agent of nonresident and bonded resident
licensees, and there shall be given to him, by the sheriff serving the
same, an extra copy of the writ or document served, together with 
                                             $.25
for filing and docketing the same.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 434:54

 **434:54 Suspension of License. –** Upon breach of the condition of
a bond, mortgage or other security, as provided in RSA 434:52 or failure
to comply with the provisions of RSA 434:41 relative to furnishing
satisfactory evidence of payments for purchases of milk or cream, the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may suspend the license
of such licensee for such time as he may deem necessary.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:55

 **434:55 Prosecutions; Penalty. –** Any person who makes a false
statement to secure a license, purchases milk or cream from producers
within this state in violation of the provisions of this subdivision, or
having obtained a license shall continue to do such business after being
notified by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food that such
license has been suspended, and before permission to resume such
business has been granted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person. District courts shall
have concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court of prosecutions
hereunder.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

Minimum Producer Dairy Prices
-----------------------------

### Section 434:56

 **434:56 Establishment of Minimum Producer Dairy Prices. –**
Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 184:106-110, the commissioner,
after consulting with the milk producers emergency relief fund board,
may establish by order an equitable minimum price to be paid to milk
producers for raw milk produced in New Hampshire on the basis of the use
thereof in the various classes, grades and forms. The commissioner,
after consulting with the board, may from time to time make, amend or
rescind an order if the commissioner finds that the federal milk
marketing order covering New Hampshire is adequate or inadequate as the
case may be to ensure a stable raw milk production and distribution
system in the state.

**Source.** 1991, 140:1, eff. May 20, 1991. 2007, 374:3, eff. June 30,
2007; 381:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 434:57

 **434:57 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, necessary to carry out the intent of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1991, 140:1, eff. May 20, 1991.

### Section 434:58

 **434:58 Prohibited Acts; Administrative Penalty. –** It shall be
unlawful for any person to buy, sell or transfer ownership of raw milk
in any form in quantities in excess of 20 quarts per day for less than
the price or prices established by order of the commissioner pursuant to
RSA 434:56. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or
any rule or order issued under this subdivision shall be liable for a
civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each violation, or each day
of a continuing violation, which may be collected in a civil action or
in connection with an action for injunctive relief brought by the
attorney general. Any person who violates any rule or order of the
commissioner adopted under this subdivision may be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1991, 140:1, eff. May 20, 1991.

Grading and Certification or Stamping of Native Lumber
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 434:59

 **434:59 Grading and Certification or Stamping of Native Lumber.
–**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this subdivision, "native lumber'' means wood
processed in the state of New Hampshire by mills registered in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 227-I. Such wood shall be
considered certified or stamped in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
                                             
 II. (a) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a mill
registered in accordance with RSA 227-I selling native lumber shall,
when required, certify in writing to the purchaser on a form approved by
the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food that the quality and
safe working stresses of the lumber are equal to or better than No. 2
grade in accordance with the conditions set forth in the American
Softwood Standard PS 20-70, or as amended, provided that lumber for use
in load bearing wall members shall be of stud grade minimum. The
certificate shall include wood species, quantity, location of use, green
or dry, sawmill name, name of permitted grader and date. The
certification shall be filed with the local building official having
jurisdiction as part of the building permit application.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), a mill registered in
accordance with RSA 227-I selling native timber may stamp such timber.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food, in
consultation with the division of forests and lands and the University
of New Hampshire cooperative extension, shall establish standards for
mill graders who will stamp or certify native lumber. The commissioner
shall issue a written permit to each mill grader who has received
training and who demonstrates by examination or other procedure
prescribed by the commissioner in rulemaking, competence and ability to
grade and certify or stamp native lumber in accordance with paragraph II
of this section. No lumber shall be sold as certified or stamped native
lumber unless it is accompanied by a certificate signed by a grader
holding a valid permit.
                                             
 IV. Any municipality which has adopted a building code which
requires regular grade stamped lumber shall accept a stamp or a
certificate prepared pursuant to this subdivision which certifies that
the native lumber meets the appropriate structural standards in lieu of
an accepted and recognized lumber grading stamp. Any structure which is
built with such approved native lumber shall be considered equivalent to
a structure built with regular grade stamped lumber.

**Source.** 1994, 152:1. 1995, 130:5; 299:15, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 434:60

 **434:60 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, necessary to administer
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1994, 152:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 434:61

 **434:61 Prohibited Acts; Administrative Penalty. –** It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell any lumber as stamped or certified
native lumber unless such lumber has been graded and certified or
stamped in accordance with RSA 434:59. Any person who violates any
provision of this subdivision or any rule or order adopted or issued
under this subdivision shall be liable for an administrative fine not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1994, 152:1, eff. July 22, 1994.
