---
title: 'CHAPTER 435 ANIMAL CARE, BREEDING AND FEED'
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 435
                                             
ANIMAL CARE, BREEDING AND FEED
------------------------------

Breeding Animals
----------------

### Section 435:1

 **435:1 Certificate. –** Every person who offers for hire the
service of a stallion for breeding purposes shall make a certificate
stating the name, color, age, size and pedigree, so far as known, of the
stallion, and the name and residence of the person by whom he was bred,
and shall cause the certificate to be recorded by the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food. He shall also post a copy of said
certificate in a conspicuous location on the premises where the stallion
is housed and shall give a copy of it to the keeper of each mare served
by the stallion for hire.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 435:2

 **435:2 Record. –** It shall be the duty of the commissioner to
record all such certificates offered for record in a book to be kept in
his office for that purpose, upon tender of lawful fees therefor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:3

 **435:3 Neglect to Furnish. –** If any person who offers for hire
the service of a stallion for breeding purposes neglects to make such
certificate, or to have it recorded, he shall not be entitled to recover
anything for the service of the stallion; neither shall he be entitled
to recover for such service from a person to whom he has not given a
copy of the certificate, unless he shows that the person had actual
knowledge of the certificate at the time of the service.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:4

 **435:4 False Statement. –** If any person knowingly and willfully
makes a false statement in such certificate, or inserts in posters or
notices advertising the stallion, or gives to the keeper of a mare
served by the stallion, a false certificate, he shall be fined 
                                             $100.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:5

 **435:5 Colts Less Than 90 Days Old. –**
                                             
 I. It is unlawful for any person in this state to have in his
possession an equine colt that is less than 90 days old that is not
being nursed by its dam, unless the colt was born in this state, and its
dam has died within this state before the colt became 90 days old.
                                             
 II. It is unlawful for any person in this state to sell an equine
colt that is less than 90 days old that is not being nursed by its dam.
                                             
 III. If convicted of a violation of this section a person shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Standardbred Breeders and Owners Development Agency
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 435:6

 **435:6 Standardbred Breeders and Owners Development Agency
Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 108:1, I, eff. July 10, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 435:7

 **435:7 Sire Stakes Program. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 108:1, II, eff.
July 10, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 435:8

 **435:8 Powers and Duties of Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 108:1, III,
eff. July 10, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 435:9

 **435:9 Sire Stakes Races. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 108:1, IV, eff. July
10, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 435:10

 **435:10 Sire Stakes Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 108:1, V, eff. July
10, 1994.
                                             ]

Treatment of Horses
-------------------

### Section 435:11

 **435:11 Similar Animals. –** The term "horse'' as used in this
subdivision shall include all members of the equine species.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:12

 **435:12 Proper Care. –** No person shall overdrive, overwork or
overload a horse in his or her care. No person shall buy, sell or
exchange any horse that is unfit to be used for riding, driving, draft
or reproduction purposes, unless it is for rehabilitation or slaughter.
No person shall torture, beat, mutilate or abandon any horse, or aid in
such abuse, or permit any horse in his or her care to be subject to
abuse of any kind.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2003, 9:1, eff. April 22,
2003.

### Section 435:13

 **435:13 Proper Feeding. –** All horses shall receive roughage in
proportion to their size, age, temperament and amount of work they are
required to perform. Grain may also be required when roughage alone will
not meet their daily nutritional requirements. All horses shall be fed
on a regular daily schedule, and all food shall be clean and free from
excessive moisture. All horses shall have available a sufficient
quantity of fresh water to maintain hydration.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2003, 9:1, eff. April 22,
2003.

### Section 435:14

 **435:14 Shelter Available. –** Horses shall be provided either:
                                             
 I. An adequately ventilated, dry barn with stalls of sufficient size
so that the horse is able to lie down, and shall be provided adequate
and suitable exercise in arenas, barn yards, paddocks or pastures; or
                                             
 II. A roofed shelter, with at least 3 sides from November 1 through
April 15, shall be provided for horses kept in paddocks or pastures, and
said horses shall not be kept tied but shall be able to move around
freely.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2003, 9:2, eff. April 22,
2003.

### Section 435:15

 **435:15 Veterinarian Services and Probable Cause Determinations.
–**
                                             
 I. A probable cause determination for seizing horses pursuant to a
cruelty investigation shall be made only by the state veterinarian or a
veterinarian licensed under the provisions of RSA 332-B. No seizing or
taking of horses shall be made without a probable cause determination.
                                             
 II. Pursuant to RSA 644:8, V, a veterinarian licensed to practice in
the state shall be held harmless from either criminal or civil liability
for any decisions made for services rendered under the provisions of
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2003, 9:2, eff. April 22,
2003.

### Section 435:15-a

 **435:15-a Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to the care, shelter, and feeding of horses, and the
enforcement of this subdivision.

**Source.** 2003, 9:3, eff. April 22, 2003.

### Section 435:16

 **435:16 Penalty. –** Any owner failing to comply with the
provisions of this subdivision shall be notified as to the proper care
of horses. Upon a second offense, the horse shall be seized and not
returned until restitution for the expenses involved in the seizure is
made and proof of proper care is given. Upon a third or subsequent
offense, the horse shall be permanently seized. Whoever violates the
provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Commercial Feed
---------------

### Section 435:17

 **435:17 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known as the New
Hampshire Commercial Feed Law of 1971.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:18

 **435:18 Enforcing Official. –** This subdivision shall be
administered by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food of
the state of New Hampshire, hereinafter referred to as the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 435:19

 **435:19 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Person'' includes individual, partnership, corporation, and
association.
                                             
 II. "Distribute'' means to offer for sale, sell, exchange, or
barter, commercial feed, or to supply, furnish, or otherwise provide
commercial feed to a contract feeder.
                                             
 III. "Distributor'' means any person who distributes.
                                             
 IV. "Commercial feed'' means all materials, except unmixed seed,
whole or processed, when not adulterated within the meaning of RSA
435:23, I, II, III, or IV which are distributed for use as feed or for
mixing in feed; provided that the commissioner by rule may exempt from
this definition, or from specific provisions of this subdivision,
commodities such as hay, straw, stover, silage, cobs, husks, hulls, and
individual chemical compounds or substances when such commodities,
compounds or substances are not intermixed or mixed with other
materials, and are not adulterated within the meaning of RSA 435:23, I,
II, III, or IV.
                                             
 V. "Feed ingredient'' means each of the constituent materials making
up a commercial feed.
                                             
 VI. "Mineral feed'' means a commercial feed intended to supply
primarily mineral elements or inorganic nutrients.
                                             
 VII. "Drug'' means any article intended for use in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in animals other
than man and articles other than feed intended to affect the structure
of any function of the animal body.
                                             
 VIII. "Customer-formula feed'' means commercial feed which consists
of a mixture of commercial feeds or feed ingredients or both, each batch
of which is manufactured according to the specific instructions of the
final purchaser.
                                             
 IX. "Manufacture'' means to grind, mix or blend, or further process
a commercial feed for distribution.
                                             
 X. "Brand name'' means any word, name, symbol, or device, or any
combination of them, identifying the commercial feed of a distributor or
registrant and distinguishing it from that of others.
                                             
 XI. "Product name'' means the name of the commercial feed which
identifies it as to kind, class or specific use.
                                             
 XII. "Label'' means a display of written, printed, or graphic matter
upon or affixed to the container in which a commercial feed is
distributed, or on the invoice or delivery slip with which a commercial
feed is distributed.
                                             
 XIII. "Labeling'' means all labels and other written, printed, or
graphic matter (a) upon a commercial feed or any of its containers or
wrappers or (b) accompanying such commercial feed.
                                             
 XIV. "Ton'' means a net weight of 2,000 pounds avoirdupois.
                                             
 XV. "Percent'' or "percentages'' means percentages by weights.
                                             
 XVI. "Official sample'' means a sample of feed taken by the
commissioner or his agent in accordance with the provisions of RSA
435:27, III, V and VI.
                                             
 XVII. "Contract feeder'' means a person who, as an independent
contractor, feeds commercial feed to animals pursuant to a contract
whereby such commercial feed is supplied, furnished, or otherwise
provided to such person and whereby such person's remuneration is
determined all or in part by feed consumption, mortality, profits, or
amount or quality of product.
                                             
 XVIII. "Pet food'' means any commercial feed prepared and
distributed for consumption by pets.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:20

 **435:20 Registration. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall manufacture a commercial feed in this state
unless he has filed with the department of agriculture, markets, and
food, on forms provided by the department, his name and place of
business and the location of each manufacturing facility in this state.
                                             
 II. No person shall distribute in this state a commercial feed,
except a customer-formula feed, which has not been registered pursuant
to the provisions of this section. Applications for registration,
accompanied by a 
                                             $75 per-product registration fee, shall be submitted
in a manner prescribed by the commissioner. Upon approval by the
commissioner, a registration shall be issued to the applicant. All
registrations shall expire on December 31 of each year.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may refuse to register any commercial feed not
in compliance with the provisions of this subdivision and to cancel any
registration subsequently found not to be in compliance with any
provision of this subdivision; provided that upon the refusal of
registration, the 
                                             $75 registration fee shall be returned to the
applicant; and provided further that no registration shall be refused or
cancelled unless the applicant or registrant has been given an
opportunity to appear at a hearing before the commissioner and to amend
his or her application in order to comply with the requirements of this
subdivision.
                                             
 IV. One-half of the fees collected under this section shall be
deposited with the state treasurer into a separate, nonlapsing account
to be known as the agricultural product and scale testing fund. The
remainder of the fees collected under this section shall be deposited in
the general fund.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 289:48, 50. 1995, 130:4. 1999, 21:1, eff.
July 1, 1999. 2005, 215:2, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 435:21

 **435:21 Labeling. –** A commercial feed shall be labeled as
follows:
                                             
 I. In case of a commercial feed, except a customer-formula feed, it
shall be accompanied by a label bearing the following information:
                                             
 (a) The net weight.
                                             
 (b) The product name and the brand name, if any, under which the
commercial feed is distributed.
                                             
 (c) The guaranteed analysis stated in such terms as the
commissioner by rule determines is required to advise the user of the
composition of the feed or to support claims made in the labeling. In
all cases, the substances or elements must be determinable by laboratory
methods such as the methods published by the Association of Official
Analytical Chemists.
                                             
 (d) The common or usual name of each ingredient used in the
manufacture of the commercial feed; provided that the commissioner by
rule may permit the use of a collective term for a group of ingredients
which perform a similar function, or he may exempt such commercial
feeds, or any group thereof, from this requirement of an ingredient
statement if he finds that such statement is not required in the
interest of consumers.
                                             
 (e) The name and principal mailing address of the manufacturer or
the person responsible for distributing the commercial feed.
                                             
 (f) Adequate directions for use for all commercial feeds
containing drugs and for such other feeds as the commissioner may
require by rule as necessary for their safe and effective use.
                                             
 (g) Such warning or caution statements as the commissioner by
rule determines are necessary for the safe and effective use of the
commercial feed.
                                             
 II. In the case of a customer-formula feed, it shall be accompanied
by a label, invoice, delivery slip, or other shipping document, bearing
the following information:
                                             
 (a) Name and address of the manufacturer.
                                             
 (b) Name and address of the purchaser.
                                             
 (c) Date of delivery.
                                             
 (d) The product name and brand name, if any, and the net weight
of each registered commercial feed used in the mixture, and the net
weight of each other ingredient used.
                                             
 (e) Adequate directions for use for all customer-formula feeds
containing drugs and for such other feeds as the commissioner may
require by rule as necessary for their safe and effective use.
                                             
 (f) Such warning or caution statements as the commissioner by
rule determines are necessary for the safe and effective use of the
customer-formula feed.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:22

 **435:22 Misbranding. –** A commercial feed shall be deemed to be
misbranded:
                                             
 I. If its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
                                             
 II. If it is distributed under the name of another commercial feed.
                                             
 III. If it is not labeled as required by RSA 435:21.
                                             
 IV. If it purports to be or is represented as a commercial feed, or
if it purports to contain or is represented as containing a commercial
feed ingredient, unless such commercial feed or feed ingredient conforms
to the definition, if any, prescribed by rule by the commissioner.
                                             
 V. If any word, statement, or other information required by or under
authority of this subdivision to appear on the label or labeling is not
prominently placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as compared with
other words, statements, designs, or devices in the labeling) and in
such terms as to render it likely to be read and understood by the
ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:23

 **435:23 Adulteration. –** A commercial feed shall be deemed to be
adulterated:
                                             
 I. (a) If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious
substance which may render it injurious to health; but in case the
substance is not an added substance, such commercial feed shall not be
considered adulterated under this subparagraph if the quantity of such
substance in such commercial feed does not ordinarily render it
injurious to health; or
                                             
 (b) If it bears or contains any added poisonous, added
deleterious, or added nonnutritive substance which is unsafe within the
meaning of section 406 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (other
than one which is (1) a pesticide chemical in or on a raw agricultural
commodity; or (2) a food additive); or
                                             
 (c) If it is a food additive which is unsafe within the meaning
of section 409 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act; or
                                             
 (d) If it is a raw agricultural commodity and it bears or
contains a pesticide chemical which is unsafe within the meaning of
section 408(a) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act; provided that
where a pesticide chemical has been used in or on a raw agricultural
commodity in conformity with an exemption granted or a tolerance
prescribed under section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act
and such raw agricultural commodity has been subjected to processing
such as canning, cooking, freezing, dehydrating, or milling, the residue
of such pesticide chemical remaining in or on such processed feed shall
not be deemed unsafe if such residue in or on the raw agricultural
commodity has been removed to the extent possible in good manufacturing
practice and the concentration of such residue in the processed feed is
not greater than the tolerance prescribed for the raw agricultural
commodity, unless the feeding of such processed feed will result or is
likely to result in a pesticide residue in the edible product of the
animal which is unsafe within the meaning of section 408(a) of the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
                                             
 II. If any valuable constituent has been in whole or in part omitted
or abstracted therefrom or any less valuable substance substituted
therefor.
                                             
 III. If its composition or quality falls below or differs from that
which it is purported or is represented to possess by its labeling.
                                             
 IV. If it contains a drug and the methods used in or the facilities
or controls used for its manufacture, processing or packaging do not
conform to current good manufacturing practice rules adopted by the
commissioner to assure that the drug meets the requirement of this
subdivision as to safety and has the identity and strength and meets the
quality and purity characteristics which it purports or is represented
to possess. In adopting such rules, the commissioner shall adopt the
current good manufacturing practice regulations for medicated feed
premixes and for medicated feeds established under authority of the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, unless he determines that they are
not appropriate to the conditions which exist in this state.
                                             
 V. If it contains viable weed seeds in amounts exceeding the limits
which the commissioner shall establish by rule.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:24

 **435:24 Prohibited Acts. –** The following acts and the causing
thereof within the state are hereby prohibited:
                                             
 I. The manufacture or distribution of any commercial feed that is
adulterated or misbranded.
                                             
 II. The adulteration or misbranding of any commercial feed.
                                             
 III. The distribution of agricultural commodities such as whole
seed, hay, straw, stover, silage, cobs, husks, and hulls, which are
adulterated within the meaning of RSA 435:23, I, II, III or IV.
                                             
 IV. The removal or disposal of a commercial feed in violation of an
order under RSA 435:28.
                                             
 V. The failure or refusal to register in accordance with RSA
435:20.
                                             
 VI. The violation of RSA 435:29, VI.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:25

 **435:25 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt such rules for
commercial feeds and pet foods as are specifically authorized in this
subdivision and such other reasonable rules as may be necessary for the
efficient enforcement of this subdivision. In the interest of
uniformity, the commissioner shall by rule adopt, unless he determines
that they are inconsistent with the provisions of this subdivision and
are not appropriate to conditions which exist in this state, the
following:
                                             
 I. The official definitions of feed ingredients and official feed
terms adopted by the Association of American Feed Control Officials and
published in the official publication of that organization, and
                                             
 II. Any regulation promulgated pursuant to the authority of the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. sec. 301 et seq.),
provided that the commissioner would have the authority under this
subdivision to adopt such regulations as rules.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:26

 **435:26 Publication of Notice. –** Before the adoption of any rule
authorized by this subdivision, the commissioner shall publish the
proposed rule in a manner reasonably calculated to give interested
parties, including all current registrants, adequate notice and shall
afford all interested persons an opportunity to present their views
thereon, orally or in writing, within a reasonable period of time. After
consideration of all views presented by interested persons, the
commissioner shall take appropriate action to adopt the proposed rule.
The provisions of this section notwithstanding, if the commissioner,
pursuant to the authority of this subdivision, adopts the official
definitions of feed ingredients or official feed terms as adopted by the
Association of American Feed Control Officials, or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the authority of the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, any amendment or modification adopted by said association
or by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the case of
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act, shall be adopted automatically under this subdivision without
regard to the publication of the notice required by this section unless
the commissioner by order specifically determines that said amendment or
modification shall not be adopted.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:27

 **435:27 Inspection, Sampling and Analysis. –**
                                             
 I. For the purpose of enforcement of this subdivision, and in order
to determine whether its provisions have been complied with, including
whether or not any operations may be subject to such provisions,
officers or employees duly designated by the commissioner, upon
presenting appropriate credentials and a written notice to the owner,
operator, or agent in charge, are authorized (a) to enter, during normal
business hours, any factory, warehouse, or establishment within the
state in which commercial feeds are manufactured, processed, packed, or
held for distribution, or to enter any vehicle being used to transport
or hold such feeds; and (b) to inspect, at reasonable times and within
reasonable limits and in a reasonable manner, such factory, warehouse,
establishment or vehicle and all pertinent equipment, finished and
unfinished materials, containers, and labeling therein. The inspection
may include the verification of only such records, and production and
control procedures as may be necessary to determine compliance with the
good manufacturing practice rules adopted under RSA 435:23, IV.
                                             
 II. A separate notice shall be given for each such inspection, but a
notice shall not be required for each entry made during the period
covered by the inspection. Each such inspection shall be commenced and
completed with reasonable promptness. Upon completion of the inspection,
the person in charge of the facility or vehicle shall be so notified.
                                             
 III. If the officer or employee making such inspection of a factory,
warehouse, or other establishment has obtained a sample in the course of
the inspection, upon completion of the inspection and prior to leaving
the premises he shall give to the owner, operator, or agent in charge a
receipt describing the samples obtained.
                                             
 IV. If the owner of any factory, warehouse or establishment
described in paragraph I or his agent refuses to admit the commissioner
or his agent to inspect in accordance with paragraphs I and II, the
commissioner is authorized to obtain from any state court a warrant
directing such owner or his agent to submit the premises described in
such warrant to inspection.
                                             
 V. For the purpose of the enforcement of this subdivision, the
commissioner or his duly designated agent is authorized to enter upon
any public or private premises including any vehicle of transport during
regular business hours to have access to, and to obtain samples, and to
examine records relating to distribution of commercial feeds.
                                             
 VI. Sampling and analysis shall be conducted in accordance with
methods published by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists, or
in accordance with other generally recognized methods.
                                             
 VII. The results of all analyses of official samples shall be
forwarded by the commissioner to the person named on the label and to
the purchaser. When the inspection and analysis of an official sample
indicate a commercial feed has been adulterated or misbranded, and upon
request within 30 days following receipt of the analysis, the
commissioner shall furnish to the registrant a portion of the sample
concerned.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner, in determining for administrative purposes
whether a commercial feed is deficient in any component, shall be guided
by the official sample as defined in RSA 435:19, XVI and obtained and
analyzed as provided for in paragraphs III, V and VI above.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:28

 **435:28 Detained Commercial Feeds. –**
                                             
 I. When the commissioner or his authorized agent has reasonable
cause to believe any lot of commercial feed is being distributed in
violation of any of the provisions of this subdivision or of any rule
adopted under this subdivision, he may issue and enforce a written or
printed "withdrawal from distribution'' order, warning the distributor
not to dispose of the lot of commercial feed in any manner until written
permission is given by the commissioner or the court. The commissioner
shall release the lot of commercial feed so withdrawn when said
provisions and rules have been complied with. If compliance is not
obtained within 30 days, the commissioner may begin, or upon request of
the distributor or registrant shall begin, proceedings for
condemnation.
                                             
 II. Any lot of commercial feed not in compliance with said
provisions and rules shall be subject to seizure on complaint of the
commissioner to a court of competent jurisdiction in the area in which
said commercial feed is located. In the event the court finds the
commercial feed to be in violation of this subdivision and orders the
condemnation of commercial feed, it shall be disposed of in any manner
consistent with the quality of the commercial feed and the laws of the
state; provided that in no instance shall the disposition of said
commercial feed be ordered by the court without first giving the
claimant an opportunity to apply to the court for release of said
commercial feed or for permission to process or relabel said commercial
feed to bring it into compliance with this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:29

 **435:29 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, violates
any provision of this subdivision or rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any subsequent offense, a person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision or any
rule adopted or order issued under this subdivision shall, in addition,
be liable for a civil forfeiture not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation, for each day of a continuing violation, which may be
collected in a civil action or in connection with an action for
injunctive relief brought by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates any provision of this subdivision, or
any rule or order of the commissioner, shall be subject to the
imposition of an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to
exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 44:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 435:30

 **435:30 Cooperation with Other Entities. –** The commissioner may
cooperate with and enter into agreements with governmental agencies of
this state, other states, agencies of the federal government, and
private associations in order to carry out the purpose and provisions of
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:31

 **435:31 Publication of Information. –** The commissioner shall
publish at least annually, in such form as he may deem proper,
information concerning the sales of commercial feeds, together with such
data on their production and use as he may consider advisable, and a
report of the results of the analyses of official samples of commercial
feeds sold within the state as compared with the analyses guaranteed in
the registration and on the label; provided that the information
concerning production and use of commercial feed shall not disclose the
operations of any person.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Feeding Garbage to Swine
------------------------

### Section 435:32

 **435:32 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Garbage'' means waste consisting in whole or in part of animal
waste, including any waste animal carcasses or offal from such carcasses
or parts thereof, but excluding waste from ordinary household operations
which is fed directly to swine on the same premises where such household
is located.
                                             
 II. "Person'' means the state, any municipality, political
subdivision, institution, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership, or other entity.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 435:33

 **435:33 Permit. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall feed garbage to swine, without first securing a
permit therefor from the commissioner or the state veterinarian. Such
permits shall be renewed one year from the date issued.
                                             
 II. This subdivision shall not apply to any person who feeds only
his own household garbage to swine which are raised for such person's
own use, or slaughtered under permit issued by the commissioner or his
agent.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:34

 **435:34 Application. –** Any person desiring to obtain a permit to
feed garbage to swine shall make written application therefor to the
commissioner or the state veterinarian in accordance with the
requirements of said commissioner or state veterinarian. At the time of
filing such application the applicant shall pay to the state department
of agriculture, markets, and food a permit fee in the sum of 
                                             $10. All
such fees shall be remitted to the state treasurer who shall place all
moneys received to the credit of the state department of agriculture,
markets, and food account for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 435:35

 **435:35 Revocation. –** Upon determination that any person having a
permit issued under this subdivision, or who has applied for a permit
under it, has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions of
this subdivision, or any of the rules adopted under it, the commissioner
or the state veterinarian may revoke such permit or refuse to issue a
permit to any applicant.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:36

 **435:36 Cooking or Other Treatment. –** All garbage, regardless of
previous processing, shall, before being fed to swine, be thoroughly
heated to at least 212 degrees Fahrenheit for at least 30 minutes,
unless treated in some other manner which shall be approved in writing
by the commissioner or the state veterinarian as being equally effective
for the protection of public health.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:36-a

 **435:36-a Quarantine Required. –** Any person who violates RSA
435:36 by feeding raw garbage to swine, except as provided in RSA
435:33, II, shall be required to have such swine quarantined and tested,
at his own expense, for brucellosis, pseudorabies, hog cholera and
African swine fever.

**Source.** 1989, 326:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 435:37

 **435:37 Inspection and Investigation; Maintenance of Records. –**
                                             
 I. Any authorized representative of the commissioner or the state
veterinarian shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the treating of garbage to be fed
to swine as required by this subdivision.
                                             
 II. Any authorized representative of the commissioner or the state
veterinarian may examine any records or memoranda pertaining to the
feeding of garbage to swine. The commissioner or the state veterinarian
may require maintenance of records relating to the operation of
equipment for any procedure of treating garbage to be fed to swine.
Copies of such records shall be submitted to the commissioner or the
state veterinarian on request.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:38

 **435:38 Cooperation with the Federal Government. –** Insofar as
available funds will permit, the commissioner or the state veterinarian
is authorized to cooperate with the United States Department of
Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industry as set forth in RSA 436:6 and may
pay such indemnities as may be agreed upon, but in no case shall the
indemnities paid by the state of New Hampshire exceed that paid by the
United States Government, and in no case shall indemnity be paid by the
state of New Hampshire for swine fed garbage that has not been treated
as provided for in RSA 435:36.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:39

 **435:39 Enforcement; Rulemaking. –** The commissioner is hereby
charged with administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
subdivision, and is authorized to adopt and enforce all rules which he
may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 435:40

 **435:40 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to
perform any duty imposed by this subdivision, or who violates any rules
adopted under it shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, such
person may be enjoined from continuing such offense. Each day upon which
such offense occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person who violates any of the provisions of
this subdivision or any rule adopted under it may be subject to an
administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $5,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 326:2, eff. June 2, 1989.

Sheep and Goat Identification
-----------------------------

### Section 435:41

 **435:41 Sheep and Goat Identification. –**
                                             
 I. Goats shall be officially identified upon change of ownership for
all animals that are not in slaughter channels. To be considered as
being in a slaughter channel, the goat shall be scheduled for a
slaughter date which is not more than 2 weeks from the date of transfer
of ownership.
                                             
 II. Sheep less than 18 months of age shall be officially identified
upon change of ownership for all animals that are not in slaughter
channels. To be considered as being in a slaughter channel, the sheep
shall be scheduled for a slaughter date which is not more than 2 weeks
from the date of transfer of ownership.
                                             
 III. Sheep 18 months of age or older shall be officially identified
upon change of ownership for all animals regardless of whether or not
they are being sold into slaughter channels. Official identification is
required for all sheep over 18 months of age as evidenced by the
eruption of the second incisor such that the animal may be traced to its
flock of birth.
                                             
 IV. The state veterinarian may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A to
clarify terms and to implement the requirements in this section, to add
exemptions from specific provisions of this section, or to comply with
requirements of the United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service.

**Source.** 2006, 15:1, eff. May 22, 2006.
