---
title: 'CHAPTER 436-A WILDLIFE DISEASE CONTROL'
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 436-A
                                             
WILDLIFE DISEASE CONTROL
------------------------

### Section 436-A:1

 **436-A:1 Vaccinations and Treatments Authorized. –** The state
veterinarian may authorize the application of vaccines and treatments
for zoonotic diseases to wildlife within the state through baiting or
other methods. The state veterinarian may solicit information pertaining
to such vaccines and treatments, and coordinate the use and application
of vaccines and treatments with the fish and game department, the
department of environmental services, the department of health and human
services, and the department of resources and economic development.

**Source.** 2002, 238:1, eff. July 16, 2002.

### Section 436-A:2

 **436-A:2 Entry Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. The state veterinarian, or the designee of the state
veterinarian, shall not be guilty of criminal trespass pursuant to RSA
635:2 when providing vaccines or treatment to wildlife on private
property without the consent of the owner, regardless of whether or not
the property is designated a secured premises.
                                             
 II. The authority to enter private property without the consent of
the owner for vaccination or treatment of wildlife does not include the
right to enter into any living quarters situated on private property.

**Source.** 2002, 238:1, eff. July 16, 2002.

### Section 436-A:3

 **436-A:3 Rulemaking. –** The state veterinarian shall adopt rules,
under RSA 541-A, relative to the administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 238:1, eff. July 16, 2002.
