---
title: CHAPTER 436 DISEASES OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 436
                                             
DISEASES OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS
----------------------------

### Section 436:1

 **436:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Person,'' "owner'' or "importer'' means any person, corporation,
association, partnership, company, firm or other aggregation of
individuals.
                                             
 II. "Domestic animals'' means all animals, including poultry, that
are kept or harbored as domesticated animals.
                                             
 III. "Vaccines'' means all biological products that contain living
organisms.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Division of Animal Industry
---------------------------

### Section 436:2

 **436:2 Division of Animal Industry. –** There shall be a division
of the department of agriculture, markets, and food known as the
division of animal industry.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5. 1999, 116:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1999.

### Section 436:3

 **436:3 Record to be Kept. –** The commissioner shall keep a record
of all permits issued and bovine animals imported, of all animals tested
on behalf of the state, or at the request of the owner, with the date
and place of the test and the name and residence of the owner; and a
complete and accurate record of all work performed under this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:4

 **436:4 Report. –** The commissioner shall, within its biennial
report pursuant to RSA 20:7, submit a written report to the governor and
council, stating in detail the work done during the preceding 2 years.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2015, 259:21, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 436:5

 **436:5 Assistance; Rules. –** The commissioner may, with such funds
as may be available for the purpose, employ such clerical, veterinary
and other assistance as he may deem necessary for the proper performance
of his duties and the fulfillment of the purpose of this chapter, and
may adopt rules under RSA 541-A for the proper execution of its
provisions.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:6

 **436:6 Federal Cooperation. –** The commissioner is authorized to
accept, on behalf of the state, the rules and regulations prepared by
the Secretary of Agriculture under and in pursuance of section 3 of an
act of Congress approved May 29, 1884, entitled "An act for the
establishment of a bureau of animal industry to prevent the exportation
of diseased cattle, and to provide means for the suppression and
extirpation of pleuropneumonia and other contagious diseases among
domestic animals,'' or of any other such act of Congress, and he may
cooperate with the authorities of the United States government within
this state in the carrying out of such rules and regulations and the
enforcement of the provisions of any such act or acts so passed which
are not in conflict with the statutes of this state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:6-a

 **436:6-a Records Disclosure. –** Information submitted by an
individual or business for the purpose of participating in a state or
national animal health or disease control system is exempt from
disclosure. Disclosure to local, state, and federal officials is not
public disclosure. This exemption does not affect the disclosure of
information used in reportable animal health investigations under this
chapter.

**Source.** 2007, 277:1, eff. Sept. 1, 2007.

State Veterinarian
------------------

### Section 436:7

 **436:7 Appointment. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food shall, with the approval of the governor and council, appoint a
graduate of a veterinary college of recognized standing, who shall have
had at least 5 years' experience in the practice of veterinary medicine,
including large animal practice, and who shall be known as the state
veterinarian and the director of the division of animal industry.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5. 1999, 116:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1999.

### Section 436:8

 **436:8 Powers. –** The state veterinarian, under the direction of
the commissioner, shall have all of the powers of the commissioner and
shall have general charge of the enforcement of this chapter. Complaints
under RSA 644:8, 644:8-a, 644:8-aa and any other law pertaining to the
abuse of domestic animals, as defined under RSA 436:1, shall initially
be filed with the local law enforcement agency, animal control officer,
state police, or sheriff which has jurisdiction over where the animal is
located or kept. At the request of the local law enforcement agency,
animal control officer, state police, or sheriff, the state veterinarian
shall assist in a secondary capacity in enforcing the provisions of and
investigating said complaints. In the event the commissioner becomes
incapacitated or a vacancy occurs in the office, the state veterinarian
shall perform all the duties of that office during any such incapacity
or until any such vacancy is filled. The commissioner may direct the
state veterinarian to act for him or her in an official capacity
whenever he or she may be absent from his or her duties.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1987, 116:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988. 2009, 123:1,
eff. Aug. 21, 2009. 2012, 240:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 436:9

 **436:9 Salary and Expenses. –** He shall receive the annual salary
prescribed by RSA 94:1-4, and shall be allowed his expenses when away
from the office of the department on official business.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:9-a

 **436:9-a Appointment. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food shall appoint a graduate of a veterinary college of recognized
standing, who shall have had at least 5 years' experience in the
practice of veterinary medicine, including large animal practice, and
who shall be known as the assistant state veterinarian.

**Source.** 2015, 276:110, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 436:9-b

 **436:9-b Powers. –** The assistant state veterinarian, under the
direction of the commissioner and state veterinarian, shall assist the
state veterinarian with the enforcement of this chapter and any other
law over which the division has regulatory authority. The state
veterinarian may direct the assistant state veterinarian to act for him
or her in an official capacity whenever he or she may be absent from his
or her duties.

**Source.** 2015, 276:110, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 436:9-c

 **436:9-c Salary and Expenses. –** The assistant state veterinarian
shall receive the annual salary prescribed by RSA 94:1 through RSA 94:4,
and shall be allowed his or her expenses when away from the office of
the department on official business.

**Source.** 2015, 276:110, eff. July 1, 2015.

Importation of Bovines
----------------------

### Section 436:10

 **436:10 Regulated. –** No person shall bring, cause to be brought,
ship, or cause to be shipped into this state any bovine without the
written permission of the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food, except those for immediate slaughter at establishments where state
or federal inspection is maintained; and such animal shall be held in
quarantine at its destination or other designated place until released
by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:11

 **436:11 Permits. –** Such permission shall be in the form of a
written or printed permit and shall state the name and address of the
importer, the number of such animals to be imported, the name of the
place where such animals are to be held in quarantine for examination,
and such other particulars as shall be deemed necessary.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:12

 **436:12 Notice of Arrival. –** When animals brought into the state
on such permit have reached their destination or other designated place,
the importer or owner or his agent shall, within 48 hours, give notice
thereof in writing to the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:13

 **436:13 Examination. –** The commissioner shall, within a
reasonable time, in person or through some competent assistant, make or
cause to be made a physical examination of all such imported animals,
and may apply such tests as he may deem necessary to determine their
health.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:14

 **436:14 Calves. –** Calves under 6 months of age from
tuberculin-tested herds, or from herds tested by any other approved
method, and accompanied by a permit and certificate of health, may be
detained in quarantine or held for tests. Such certificate of health
shall be executed under oath by the party making the shipment, or his
duly qualified agent.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:15

 **436:15 Release from Quarantine. –** Such animals as shall be found
to be free from tuberculosis or other contagious or infectious disease
shall immediately be released from quarantine.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:16

 **436:16 Diseased Animals. –** Such animals as shall be found to
have any infectious or contagious disease shall immediately be
slaughtered by and at the expense of the importer or owner or held in
strict quarantine, if the disease is curable, under rules adopted by the
commissioner; provided that registered purebred bovine animals, reacting
to the tuberculin or other approved test, but showing no marked physical
indications of tuberculosis, may be retained by the importer or owner in
quarantine and be subject to the provision of RSA 436:62-68.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:17

 **436:17 Disposal of Carcasses. –** When slaughtered, the carcasses,
under rules adopted by the commissioner, shall be burned or covered with
lime and buried, or may be shipped to a fertilizer or rendering plant;
provided that the meat of animals reacting to the tuberculin or other
approved test, but showing no physical indications of tuberculosis or
brucellosis, may be used or sold for food under rules adopted by the
department of health and human services or in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Bureau of Animal Industry of the United States
Department of Agriculture under the federal meat inspection law.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 436:18

 **436:18 Witnessing Disposal. –** When such animals are killed on
the premises of their importer or owner, the commissioner or his agent
shall witness their burial or burning as aforesaid, unless their
carcasses are shipped, used or sold as herein provided.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:19

 **436:19 Hides. –** The importer or owner may retain the hides of
such animals as are slaughtered, if slaughtered upon his premises,
except from animals infected with glanders, anthrax, black leg or foot
and mouth disease.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:20

 **436:20 Proceeds of Carcasses. –** If the carcasses are used, sold
or shipped to a fertilizer or rendering plant, the importer or owner
shall be entitled to the net proceeds from the salvage.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July, 1, 1985.

Importation of Tested Bovines
-----------------------------

### Section 436:21

 **436:21 Without Quarantine. –** The commissioner may permit bovine
animals to be brought into this state, without being confined in
quarantine at their destination or other designated place, when they
have been tested in the state of their origin within 3 months prior to
being brought into this state by a veterinarian whose competency and
reliability are certified to by the authority charged with the control
of contagious or infectious diseases in the state where said test or
tests were made, or when they are accompanied by a certificate of
health, showing satisfactory tests made by an inspector of the Bureau of
Animal Industry of the United States.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:22

 **436:22 Accredited Cattle. –** Cattle from an accredited herd,
tested within 12 months prior to being brought into this state, may be
allowed to enter without being held in quarantine and without being
subjected to a test.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:23

 **436:23 Retesting. –** When the commissioner has reason to believe
that the test or tests were not made in a competent or reliable manner,
he may require that such animals shall be confined in quarantine at
destination or other designated place, and be subjected to a retest at
the expiration of a period not to exceed 60 days. If, upon testing, they
shall be found to be infected with any contagious or infectious disease
they shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 436:10-20.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Importation of Other Domestic Animals
-------------------------------------

### Section 436:24

 **436:24 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt such rules as
he may deem necessary relating to the importation into this state of
horses, asses, mules, sheep, swine or other domestic animals, except as
provided for by RSA 436:10. He may require that a physical examination
or test be made of every such animal brought, driven or shipped into
this state, may adopt quarantine rules for all such animals and may
adopt whatever rules he deems necessary to prevent the introduction into
this state of contagious or infectious diseases.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:25

 **436:25 Diseased Animals. –** When such animals are found to have
any contagious or infectious disease, they shall immediately be
slaughtered by, and at the expense of, the importer or owner, or held in
strict quarantine, if the disease is curable, under rules adopted by the
commissioner; and when slaughtered the carcasses shall be subject to the
provisions of RSA 436:17 relating to the disposition of the same; but in
no case shall the importer or owner retain the hide of any animal
infected with glanders or anthrax, nor shall the carcass of any animal
infected with glanders or anthrax be shipped to a fertilizer or
rendering plant.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:26

 **436:26 Expense of Examination, etc. –** The importer or owner
shall bear the expense of detention, examination, test and slaughter
under this subdivision and RSA 436:10-20, but not the personal expenses
of the commissioner or his agent.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Permits to Those on State Line or Shipping Interstate
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 436:27

 **436:27 Permits To Drive Animals. –** Persons living near the state
line who own or occupy land in an adjoining state, or persons living in
an adjoining state who own or occupy land in this state near the state
line, may secure from the commissioner a permit to drive cattle, horses,
asses, mules or sheep back and forth to pasture and for other purposes,
subject to such restrictions or regulation as he may deem necessary in
any particular case.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:28

 **436:28 Issuance of Health Certificates. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may prepare and issue health certificates for
interstate shipment of livestock and poultry.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, for the
preparation and issuance of health certificates authorized by paragraph
I.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:29

 **436:29 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who drives, brings or ships domestic animals into this
state, or is an accessory thereto, knowing or having reason to believe
that any of them have a contagious or infectious disease or have been
exposed to any such disease, or violates any of the provisions or rules
relating to importation or quarantine, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person. The
bringing, shipping or driving of each animal into this state in
violation of the provisions of this section or in violation of the
importation or quarantine rules shall constitute a separate offense.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person who violates any of the provisions of
this subdivision or rules adopted under it may be subject to an
administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 13:1, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:30

 **436:30 Interstate Transportation. –** The provisions of RSA 436:29
shall not apply to livestock being transported through the state in
interstate commerce.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Investigations and Reports
--------------------------

### Section 436:31

 **436:31 Investigations. –** The commissioner shall cause systematic
investigation, insofar as available funds will permit, to be made as to
the existence of pleuropneumonia, foot and mouth disease, glanders, hog
cholera, anthrax, black leg, hemorrhagic septicemia, rabies, scrapie,
fowl cholera, European fowl pest, or any other infectious or contagious
disease among cattle, horses, asses, mules, sheep, swine and all other
domestic animals, and the commissioner or the commissioner's duly
authorized agent may enter any premises, including stockyards within any
part of the state in or at which the commissioner has reason to believe
that there exists or may exist any such disease and make search,
investigation and inquiry in regard to the existence thereof.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 2001, 242:2, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 436:32

 **436:32 Aid. –** The commissioner may call to his aid, if
necessary, the police officer or constable of the city or town, or the
sheriff of the county, in which such animals may be located and all such
officers when so called upon by said commissioner or his duly authorized
agent, shall assist in the enforcement of the provisions of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:33

 **436:33 Notice to Commissioner. –** Whenever a local board of
health or its executive officer, veterinarian, selectman or any person
has notice of or suspects the existence of any of the diseases named in
RSA 436:31, or other contagious or infectious diseases among domestic
animals, such board of health or person shall immediately notify the
commissioner in writing, stating the grounds for such belief or
suspicion. Any owner suspecting the existence of any such disease among
his domestic animals shall immediately notify the commissioner in
writing of such fact.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Quarantine
----------

### Section 436:34

 **436:34 Quarantine of Animals. –** Whenever the commissioner, upon
investigation or upon notification, has reason to believe that a
domestic animal or captive wildlife is infected with a contagious or
infectious disease the commissioner shall immediately cause it to be
quarantined or isolated upon the premises of the owner or the person in
whose possession it is found, or in such other place or enclosure as the
commissioner may designate, and the removal of the animal from any
premises where it may be ordered to be kept shall be forbidden.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1997, 43:1, eff. May 12, 1997.

### Section 436:35

 **436:35 Quarantine of Premises. –** The commissioner may quarantine
the premises upon which there is a domestic animal or captive wildlife
infected with any contagious or infectious disease, or that is suspected
of being so infected, or that has been exposed to such disease, and may
forbid the removal of any such animal or wildlife or any animals or
wildlife susceptible to such disease by serving a written order upon the
owner or person in possession of said premises or by posting a copy of
such order at the premises' usual entrance. Such animal or wildlife or
animals or wildlife shall be kept under quarantine for such periods of
time as the commissioner may deem necessary to prevent the spread of the
suspected disease to other animals off the quarantined premises. The
commissioner may determine the length of quarantine based upon the
recommendations of the United States Animal Health Association and the
United States Department of Agriculture.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1997, 43:2, eff. May 12, 1997.

### Section 436:36

 **436:36 Quarantine of Locality. –** If any such disease becomes
epidemic, the commissioner may issue a proclamation quarantining the
locality and forbidding the removal from the locality of any animal so
diseased or susceptible without his permission.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:37

 **436:37 Destroying Notice of Quarantine. –** No person shall tear
down, mutilate, deface or destroy any such notice or order issued by the
commissioner when posted as provided herein, during the pendency of such
notice or order.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:38

 **436:38 Penalty for Violations. –**
                                             
 I. Whoever violates a quarantine provision or rule shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. In addition, whoever violates a quarantine provision or rule
relating to a quarantine may be subject to an administrative fine levied
by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 13:2, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:39

 **436:39 Examinations. –** Whenever animals have been quarantined as
herein provided, the commissioner, within a reasonable time, shall cause
a physical examination of such animals to be made. If, on such physical
examination, he deems it necessary, he may apply the tuberculin or any
other approved test. He shall not, when he suspects bovine tuberculosis,
take any action based upon such physical examination except in advanced
cases unless the tuberculin or other approved test is applied and such
test confirms the result of the physical examination. If any animal is
found to have bovine tuberculosis, he may cause a test to be made of the
entire herd in which such animal was found or of any animal which may
have been exposed to said disease. If the disease suspected is one which
science has demonstrated can be controlled in susceptible animals by the
proper vaccination of said animals, the commissioner or his agent may
order any and all susceptible animals vaccinated or treated as he may
deem advisable.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Disposal of Diseased Animals
----------------------------

### Section 436:40

 **436:40 Test; Slaughter. –** If the veterinarian authorized by the
commissioner to examine or test an animal for the presence of an
infectious or contagious disease certifies to the commissioner in
writing that he has made an examination or test in accordance with the
rules adopted by the commissioner, that in his judgment such animal is
infected with a specific infectious or contagious disease, or that its
destruction is necessary in order to prevent or suppress, or to aid in
preventing or suppressing such disease such animal shall, except in
cases herein otherwise provided, forthwith be slaughtered by and at the
expense of the owner or the person in possession thereof, and the
carcass shall be dealt with as provided for the disposal of carcasses of
imported animals after slaughter.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:41

 **436:41 Expense. –** The cost of examination or test in such cases
and the expenses of the commissioner or his agents shall be borne by the
state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Tests on Application of Owner; Vaccination
------------------------------------------

### Section 436:42

 **436:42 By Commissioner. –** The owner of cattle, horses, asses,
mules, sheep or swine may apply to the commissioner for an examination
of his animals for tuberculosis, brucellosis or glanders, subject to the
provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:43

 **436:43 Application. –** The application shall be upon a blank form
provided by the commissioner, and shall include an agreement on the part
of the owner of such animals to improve faulty sanitary conditions, to
disinfect his premises if diseased animals should be found, to follow
directions of the commissioner designed to prevent reinfection of his
herd or other animals, and to suppress the disease and prevent its
spread.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:44

 **436:44 Examination; Disposal. –** As soon as possible after
receipt of an application, the commissioner or some competent
veterinarian in his employ shall make a thorough physical examination of
such animals, and may subject them to the tuberculin, mallein or other
approved test, and if any of the animals react to the test so made, or
upon physical examination are found to be infected with a contagious or
infectious disease, they shall be condemned and slaughtered after
appraisal, or held in strict quarantine as provided for by this chapter
in the case of registered purebred tuberculous bovines. After slaughter,
the carcasses shall be disposed of as provided under RSA 436:17.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:45

 **436:45 Expense; Indemnity. –** The cost of examination or test
shall be borne by the state; but if the owner, after signing the above
agreement, shall knowingly fail to carry out its terms, he shall forfeit
any indemnity to which he would otherwise be entitled for any animals
found to be infected.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:46

 **436:46 Surveillance Tests. –** The commissioner shall make such
tests for tuberculosis and brucellosis from time to time as he sees fit
at the expense of the state. If any suspects shall show as the result of
such tests he shall quarantine said animals or the herd premises or
both; further, should any reactors to such tests be found, the entire
premises shall be quarantined, reactors tagged, branded, appraised,
slaughtered and paid for as provided by this subdivision. The reactor
premises shall remain quarantined until reactors are legally removed,
properly disinfected and a sufficient number of negative tests of
remaining animals on said premises are determined by the commissioner to
be sufficient proof that there is no longer any evidence of the disease
present on the premises.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:47

 **436:47 Vaccination Against Brucellosis. –** Upon application of
any owner of bovine animals, the state may vaccinate said bovine animals
against brucellosis (Bang's disease) with strain 19 or other approved
vaccine. The age at which animals are to be vaccinated shall be
determined by the state veterinarian, based upon the recommendations of
the United States Animal Health Association and the United States
Department of Agriculture. The cost of said vaccination, including the
cost of the vaccine, may be borne by the state. The vaccination shall be
done by a licensed accredited graduate veterinarian under the direction
of the commissioner, and all animals vaccinated shall be properly and
permanently identified.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1994, 68:1, eff. July 5, 1994.

### Section 436:48

 **436:48 Alternate Plan. –** The commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food may grant permission to adult-vaccinate under this
alternate plan a herd seriously infected with brucellosis. If an owner
is refused permission to adult-vaccinate his herd, he may appeal to the
county approval board. A request to adult-vaccinate shall be made in
writing to the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food. The
county approval board shall consist of 3 members in each county, 2 to be
appointed by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food and
these 2 to appoint a third member; all members to serve without pay or
expenses at the pleasure of the commissioner and until their successor
or successors shall be appointed. Whenever a person receives permission
to adult-vaccinate under this section, it shall be granted under rules
and regulations approved by the federal Bureau of Animal Industry and by
the state department of agriculture, markets, and food. All calves
raised in such herds shall be vaccinated according to such rules as are
adopted for calfhood vaccination. All bovine animals in the herd shall
be tested for brucellosis and reactors tagged, branded, appraised and
slaughtered as provided for under this chapter before any animals shall
be vaccinated. All nonreacting animals shall be permanently identified
by ear tag number and tattoo mark. No animal shall be sold out of an
adult-vaccinated herd for any purpose except by written permission from
the New Hampshire department of agriculture, markets, and food, division
of animal industry. No indemnity shall be paid on any animal vaccinated
at an age older than 8 months. Any owner maintaining a herd under the
terms of this chapter agrees to forfeit any and all indemnity on animals
condemned and slaughtered after adult vaccination has once been started
in a herd, and until such time as the herd passes at least one clean
test for brucellosis and adult vaccination has been discontinued. An
owner of an adult-vaccinated herd shall discontinue all vaccination with
strain 19 in his adult animals on or before 3 years from the date of the
receipt of application for adult vaccination by the commissioner, but
said herd owner may reapply for adult vaccination under this plan at any
time thereafter. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may
order the discontinuance of adult vaccination in any herd when, in his
opinion, it is evident that said adult-vaccinated animals become a
menace to other healthy herds. Such adult-vaccinated herds shall be
under strict quarantine at all times and shall be subject to test at
such times as the commissioner may direct.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:4, 5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:49

 **436:49 Pasteurization of Milk from Herds Adopting Alternate Plan.
–** Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, milk from
such herds that adopt this alternate plan, including milk from such
reactors, may be sold to consumers, but only after being pasteurized.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Private Tests
-------------

### Section 436:50

 **436:50 Report. –** All private tuberculin or other approved tests
shall be reported to the commissioner by the person making the test
within 5 days from the time said test is completed.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:51

 **436:51 Contents. –** The report shall include, when the test is
made by the subcutaneous method, a complete temperature record and such
other information as the commissioner may require, and, when said test
is made by either the intradermal or ophthalmic methods, a complete
record of such reaction or reactions as appeared, and such other
information as the commissioner may require.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:52

 **436:52 Reactors. –** If such tests are made by a veterinarian
approved by the commissioner to make the same and any reactors are
found, they shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 436:42-49.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:53

 **436:53 Penalty for Failure to Report. –** Whoever fails to report
such tests shall be fined not more than 
                                             $100.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Examination of Carcasses
------------------------

### Section 436:54

 **436:54 Examination; Report. –** The carcass of every animal duly
condemned for bovine tuberculosis and slaughtered under the provisions
of this chapter shall be examined by a veterinarian or physician
designated by the commissioner for the purpose of determining whether or
not disease existed in such animal. Such postmortem examination shall be
under rules adopted by the commissioner, and the report thereof shall
show conditions found upon such examination duly verified by the person
making such examination. Such report shall be filed with the
commissioner, and a copy shall be sent or delivered to the owner or
person in possession of the animal so examined.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Appraisal and Indemnity
-----------------------

### Section 436:55

 **436:55 Appraisers. –** The value of all animals directed to be
killed by order of the commissioner or his agent shall be first
appraised by the owner and the commissioner or his agent. In the event
of a disagreement as to the amount of the appraisal, they shall select a
third disinterested person to act with them, the expense of said third
appraiser being paid by said owner. The value so determined shall be
final.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:56

 **436:56 Valuation. –** In making such appraisals, the fact that the
animals have been condemned for disease shall not be considered, and the
animals shall be appraised for their true market value.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:57

 **436:57 Importations. –** In no case shall compensation be allowed
for any animals destroyed which may have contracted or been exposed to
such disease in a foreign country, or on the high seas, or which have
been brought or shipped into this state within 3 months previous to
showing evidence of such disease, except animals that have been imported
directly from tuberculosis or brucellosis free herds, and are
accompanied by properly approved health charts certifying that fact; and
the owner or person in possession thereof shall furnish satisfactory
evidence as to the time during which such animals have been owned in the
state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:58

 **436:58 Concealment. –** No compensation shall be allowed to any
owner who in person or by his agent knowingly and willfully conceals the
existence of such disease or the fact of exposure to it in animals of
which the person making such concealment, by himself or his agent, is in
whole or part owner, nor shall compensation be allowed for bovine
animals condemned by the tuberculin or brucellosis test unless said test
is authorized by the commissioner or his agent.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:59

 **436:59 Certificates. –** In case the animal condemned is
registered, the owner shall furnish to the commissioner a certificate of
registration before the claim is paid.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:60

 **436:60 Payments. –** The state shall pay the owner after he has
filed such certificate or certificates as the commissioner may direct an
amount not to exceed 
                                             $100 for a grade animal and 
                                             $200 for a purebred
registered animal on all horses and bovine animals condemned and killed,
provided that the amount received from salvage from the federal
government and the state shall not exceed the appraised value thereof.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:61

 **436:61 Limitation. –** If the total amount to be paid from all
such sources should exceed the appraisal value, the indemnity to be paid
by the state shall be only the difference between the amount received
from such sources other than the state and said value.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Retention for Breeding Purposes
-------------------------------

### Section 436:62

 **436:62 Quarantine. –** Under rules adopted by the commissioner and
approved by the department of health and human services, registered
purebred bovines which have responded to the tuberculin or other
approved test, but which show no marked indications of tuberculosis, may
be retained by the owner in quarantine and be used for breeding
purposes.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 436:63

 **436:63 Killing. –** Such animals may be condemned and killed at
any time by the commissioner when, in his judgment, conditions require
such action.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:64

 **436:64 No Compensation. –** In case such animals quarantined under
the provisions of this subdivision are at any time condemned or killed
after having been used for breeding purposes, the owner shall not
receive compensation therefor from the state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:65

 **436:65 Milk of Retained Animals. –** The milk of such animals may,
with the approval of the commissioner, be used after boiling or heating
to a temperature of 212 degrees Fahrenheit or after proper
pasteurization.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:66

 **436:66 Offspring. –** The offspring of such animals shall be
removed and kept apart immediately following birth, and shall be tested
by tuberculin or other approved test, at a period not less than 6 months
nor more than 9 months from birth.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:67

 **436:67 Premises. –** The premises on which such animals are kept
shall be at all times subject to inspection by the commissioner or his
agent or by the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 436:68

 **436:68 Sale. –** If no marked physical indications of tuberculosis
have developed, such animals may be sold for immediate slaughter in any
slaughterhouse under rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services, or in
accordance with rules and regulations of the Bureau of Animal Industry
of the United States under the federal meat inspection laws.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1; 190:18. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Marks and Records for Tested Animals
------------------------------------

### Section 436:69

 **436:69 Sound Animals. –** Whenever a bovine is tested with the
tuberculin or other approved test, under any of the provisions of this
chapter, and passes the test satisfactorily to the commissioner or his
agent, such animal, except purebred registered cattle, shall have a
numbered tag placed in its ear, unless already so tagged.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:70

 **436:70 Reactors. –** Any bovine in which tuberculosis or
brucellosis is diagnosed by the commissioner or his agent on physical
examination, or by means of the tuberculin or brucellosis test, which is
not immediately slaughtered under the supervision of the commissioner or
his agent, shall be marked by inserting in its left ear a metal tag upon
which is stamped a number and the word "Reactor'', and by branding the
letter T or the letter B, not less than 2 nor more than 3 inches high on
the left jaw.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:71

 **436:71 Tags. –** Tags for such purposes shall be furnished by the
commissioner, at the expense of the state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:72

 **436:72 Records. –** The commissioner shall keep a complete record
of all tags so issued. In the case of reacting bovines, he shall also
keep a complete description of said animals.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:73

 **436:73 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Whoever intentionally removes or defaces any tag so inserted,
without the consent of the commissioner or his agent, or exhibits or
displays any certificate that a specifically named herd has been found
to be in a healthy condition and free from reactors, unless the
certificate was issued by the commissioner, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person who violates any of the provisions of
this subdivision or rules adopted under it may be subject to an
administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 13:3, eff. April 4, 1989.

Sale of Diseased Animals
------------------------

### Section 436:74

 **436:74 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, knowing or having reason to believe that any
horse is infected with glanders, or that any swine is infected with hog
cholera, or that any domestic animal is infected with anthrax or black
leg, hemorrhagic septicemia, contagious infectious abortion, or any
other contagious or infectious disease, shall sell, offer for sale,
trade or barter, or expose or allow it to be exposed upon any public
highway or in any public place, without the written permission of the
commissioner or his agent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person who violates any of the provisions of
this subdivision or rules adopted under it may be subject to an
administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 13:4, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:75

 **436:75 Contract of Sale. –** No animal showing physical evidence
of tuberculosis or brucellosis, or in which such disease shall have been
indicated as a result of the tuberculin or other approved test, shall be
sold other than for immediate slaughter, said slaughtering to be ordered
by and under the supervision of the commissioner or his agent, except
under a written contract approved by the commissioner, signed by both
parties, describing the animal and stating that it is believed to be
tuberculous or infected with brucellosis. A contract of sale as provided
by this section shall be executed in triplicate and one copy thereof
delivered to the purchaser, one kept by the seller, and the other
delivered to the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:76

 **436:76 Permit for Removal. –** No such animal shall be removed
except for immediate slaughter from the premises where examined, except
upon the written permission of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Report of Animals Killed
------------------------

### Section 436:77

 **436:77 Making. –** Any person who kills a bovine, sheep or swine,
or causes any such animal to be killed, knowing or having reason to
believe at the time of said killing, or upon the inspection of the
carcass thereof finding, or having reason to believe, that it is
infected with a contagious or infectious disease, shall immediately
notify the board of health of the city or town in which such animal was
killed and the commissioner of the existence of such disease, of the
place where the animal was found, of the name of the owner or person in
possession thereof and of the disposal made of such carcass.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:78

 **436:78 Exception. –** The provisions of RSA 436:77 shall not apply
when said killing was done under the supervision of the commissioner or
his agent, or an inspector of said board of health or an inspector of
the United States Department of Agriculture.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:79

 **436:79 Penalty. –** Any person who shall fail or neglect to send
notifications as provided by RSA 436:77 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Sale of Vaccines
----------------

### Section 436:80

 **436:80 Label. –** Sale and use of biological products and
diagnostic reagents produced for animal use which are sold, given away
or used within this state shall bear a label stating the name and
address of the person, firm or institution producing it and the date of
preparation. Said label and certification of licensure by the United
States Department of Agriculture shall be submitted to the commissioner
for his approval prior to acceptance for distribution in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:81

 **436:81 Virulent Hog Cholera Virus Prohibited. –** No person may
manufacture, transport, possess or use virulent hog cholera virus.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:82

 **436:82 Exception. –** The provisions of this subdivision shall not
apply to biological products and diagnostic reagents manufactured or
issued by the United States Department of Agriculture.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Penalties
---------

### Section 436:83

 **436:83 Interference With Tests. –** Any person who intentionally
interferes with or hinders the work of the commissioner or his agents;
or who attempts to defeat the object of a test by a previous injection
of tuberculin or any other drug, known as plugging; or who in any other
way attempts to prevent an accurate and truthful determination of the
condition of the animal tested; or who shall treat any animal with
material or substance to prevent normal reaction, except for
experimental purposes and with the consent of the commissioner, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such treatment shall constitute a separate
offense.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 436:84

 **436:84 General Penalty. –** Any person who violates a provision of
this chapter, or a rule adopted by the commissioner in accordance
therewith, for which a penalty is not otherwise provided, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, such person may be subject to an
administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000
for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 13:5, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:85

 **436:85 Veterinarians. –** Any veterinarian who violates any of the
provisions relating to the sale and use of tuberculin, in addition to
fines and penalties prescribed, shall be reported to the state board of
veterinary medicine. The board, after hearing, may revoke the license of
the veterinarian for a period not to exceed one year; provided that this
section shall not limit the power otherwise conferred upon said board.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

Livestock Events
----------------

### Section 436:86

 **436:86 Definitions; Doping and Stimulating Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. In this subdivision:
                                             
 (a) "Livestock event'' means pulling contests, trail rides,
carriage events, horse shows, races, dressage exhibitions, private and
organized sales, and other competitive events involving horses, cattle
or oxen.
                                             
 (b) "Person'' means any person who is acting on behalf of the
owner of such animals as his agent or representative or any person who
has the animals under his control during such livestock events in this
state.
                                             
 (c) "Owner'' means any person who has in his possession clear
title to animals participating in any livestock event in this state.
                                             
 II. It is unlawful for any person to administer internally or
externally a drug, stimulants, or appliances of a nature that could
affect or alter the normal performance of an animal entered in a
livestock event.
                                             
 III. A signed statement of ownership, including a complete
description of each animal participating in a livestock event, shall be
submitted to the event management prior to participation in any such
livestock event in this state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1987, 187:2. 1988, 80:1, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 436:87

 **436:87 Test Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may take such
tests of the saliva, urine, blood, or all 3, of any animal entered in a
livestock event as he may deem necessary. If a drug is found in the
chemical analysis of said saliva, urine, or blood it shall be prima
facie evidence that a drug has been administered.
                                             
 II. Failure by an owner or person to submit an animal for testing or
failure to provide adequate assistance for the commissioner's agent to
obtain an official sample shall be subject to an administrative fine and
the provisions of RSA 436:88-a, III.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1987, 187:2. 1988, 80:2. 1995, 130:5, eff. July
23, 1995.

### Section 436:88

 **436:88 Hearing, Finding, Order. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 187:4, I,
eff. July 11, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 436:88-a

 **436:88-a Penalty. –** Within 14 days from the date test results in
which a drug is shown to be present are received by the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food, the commissioner shall notify the fair
association or management of the livestock event and the owner of the
tested animals of such results.
                                             
 I. Any person or owner who violates any of the provisions of this
subdivision or who violates any rules adopted under this subdivision,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person or owner who violates any of the
provisions of this subdivision or rule adopted under it may be subject
to an administrative fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed

                                             $1,000 for each violation.
                                             
 III. Any person or owner who is subject to paragraph I or II of this
section shall forfeit any premiums or trophies offered at any livestock
event. Such person or owner and the animals tested under RSA 436:87
shall be ineligible to compete in any future livestock event for a
period not to exceed 2 years from the date of the administrative fine
levied or any court conviction.
                                             
 IV. Any person fined or convicted of doping and stimulating animals
entered into livestock events in any other state shall be ineligible to
compete in any livestock event in this state for a period not to exceed
2 years from the date of such fine or court conviction.

**Source.** 1987, 187:3. 1988, 80:3. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:89

 **436:89 Pending Decision. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 187:4, II, eff. July
11, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 436:90

 **436:90 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The method of levying the administrative fines under RSA
436:88-a, II.
                                             
 II. The drugs, stimulants, or appliances that are prohibited in a
livestock event.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1988, 80:4. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.
2012, 171:20, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 436:91

 **436:91 Appeal. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 187:4, III, eff. July 11,
1987.
                                             ]

Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
--------------------------------

### Section 436:92

 **436:92 Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory. –** There is hereby
established, in the agriculture experiment station at the university of
New Hampshire, a veterinary diagnostic laboratory for the diagnosis and
early detection of infectious and contagious diseases of domestic
animals which advanced medical knowledge has shown to be important to
human or animal health. The laboratory shall conduct procedures in
bacteriology, virology, parasitology, serology, and histological and
clinical pathology and in such other subjects as the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food shall direct. The laboratory shall be
operated by the agricultural experiment station. Any funds made
available for the operation of said laboratory shall be expended under
the supervision of the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:92-a

 **436:92-a Commission to Study Permanent Options for Funding the
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013, 99:2, eff. Nov.
1, 2013.
                                             ]

Equine Infectious Anemia
------------------------

### Section 436:93

 **436:93 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Accredited veterinarian'' means a veterinarian who is licensed
pursuant to RSA 332-B and, in addition, is accredited by the United
States Department of Agriculture and the department of agriculture,
markets, and food of this state.
                                             
 II. "Asymptomatic positive reactor'' means any equine which reacts
positively to an official test but which is apparently healthy, showing
no symptoms of equine infectious anemia.
                                             
 II-a. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 III. "Equine'' means any member of the equine family which includes
horses, mules, asses and zebra.
                                             
 IV. "Equine infectious anemia'', also known as swamp fever, means a
disease of equines caused by a virus which is infectious and may be
spread from horse to horse by blood-sucking insects, unsterile surgical
instruments and community use of equipment that may produce cuts or
abrasions. Both sexes may be affected at any age. Infected animals
remain carriers for life, constituting a potential source of disease
spread. The disease may be acute, chronic, or inapparent.
                                             
 V. "Official test'' means the agar gel immune diffusion blood test
conducted in a laboratory approved by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service and the state
veterinarian.
                                             
 VI. "Reactor'' means an equine over one year of age whose blood
serum reacts positively to an approved serological test for equine
infectious anemia performed by an approved laboratory.
                                             
 VII. "State veterinarian'' means the veterinarian appointed pursuant
to this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 12:1. 1995, 130:4, 7, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:94

 **436:94 Requirement for a Second Test. –** Any equine in the state
which reacts positively to an official test is hereby required to be
tested a second time at the expense of the state; and, if the test reads
positive a second time, the equine shall be so identified with a freeze
marking 12A which shall be at least 2 inches high. Such marking shall be
applied to the left shoulder or the left side of the neck of the
reactor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 12:2, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:95

 **436:95 Equines Imported Into New Hampshire; Testing Requirements.
–**
                                             
 I. All equines that are imported into the state shall be accompanied
by an official interstate health certificate. Such certificate shall
state that each equine has been officially tested and found to be
negative to equine infectious anemia within a period not to exceed 6
months prior to the date of entry. The test and the certificate required
under this section shall be performed, completed and signed,
respectively, by an accredited veterinarian.
                                             
 II. Equines may be shipped into the state for research purposes or
for immediate slaughter in an approved slaughter establishment after
first obtaining a special permit from the state veterinarian.
                                             
 III. Each certificate under paragraph I shall be for one equine only
and shall include the name and address of the owner, trainer or person
responsible for the equine; in addition, it shall also include the name
and registration number of the equine, if any, and sex, age, color and
positive identifying marks or scars with a complete description of
each.
                                             
 IV. If, in the opinion of the state veterinarian or his
representative, the certificate does not properly or accurately describe
the equine in question, he may cause the equine to be held and retested
at the expense of the owner or to be returned to the state of origin
after receiving prior approval from the proper regulatory officials of
the state of origin.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 12:3, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:96

 **436:96 Equine Reactors; Rulemaking. –** Any equine found positive
after an official retest performed pursuant to RSA 436:94 shall be
permanently quarantined on the premises where the test was performed and
isolated from all other equines. The commissioner shall adopt rules
under RSA 541-A relative to the quarantine, isolation, and disposal of
reactors.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 12:4, eff. April 4, 1989.

### Section 436:97

 **436:97 Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 21:1, eff. June 17, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 436:98

 **436:98 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates this subdivision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person or owner who violates any of the
provisions of this subdivision or rule adopted under it may be subject
to an administrative fine levied by the commissioner not to exceed

                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 12:5, eff. April 4, 1989.

Rabies Control
--------------

### Section 436:99

 **436:99 Definitions. –** As used in this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Dog'' shall mean any canine animal, male or female, sexed or
neutered.
                                             
 I-a. "Cat'' shall mean any domestic feline animal, male or female,
sexed or neutered.
                                             
 I-b. "Ferret'' shall mean any European domestic ferret (Mustela
furo), male or female, sexed or neutered.
                                             
 II. "Vaccination against rabies'' shall mean the inoculation of a
dog, cat, or ferret with a rabies vaccine licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture. Such vaccination shall be performed by a
veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine.
                                             
 III. "Own,'' unless otherwise specified, shall mean to keep, harbor,
or have control, charge, or custody of a dog, cat, or ferret. This term
shall not apply to dogs, cats, or ferrets owned by others which are
temporarily maintained on the premises of a veterinarian or kennel
operator.
                                             
 IV. "Owner'' shall mean any person keeping, harboring, or having
charge or control of, or permitting any dog, cat, or ferret to
habitually be or remain on, or be lodged or fed within such person's
house, yard, or premises. This term shall not apply to veterinarians or
kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises dogs, cats,
or ferrets owned by others.
                                             
 V. "Stray'' shall mean any dog that has wandered beyond limits of
confinement or is lost and does not possess any tags of identification.
                                             
 VI. "Transient dogs, cats, or ferrets'' shall mean any out-of-state
dog, cat or ferret temporarily housed in the state for any purpose.
                                             
 VII. "Commissioner'' shall mean the commissioner of agriculture,
markets, and food.
                                             
 VIII. "Rabies control authority'' shall mean the town or city
manager of the respective town or city and, in the absence thereof, the
board of selectmen or mayor.
                                             
 IX. "Nonbite exposure'' means any scratch, abrasion, open wound, or
mucous membrane contaminated with saliva or other potentially infectious
material, such as brain tissue, from a cat, dog, ferret, or any other
domestic or wild animal. Contact with blood, urine, or feces shall not
constitute an exposure.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:1, 2. 1993, 275:1. 1995, 130:5; 202:1
to 3, eff. June 12, 1995.

### Section 436:100

 **436:100 Rabies Vaccination Required; Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, every dog, cat, and ferret 3
months of age and older shall be vaccinated against rabies. Young dogs,
cats, and ferrets shall be vaccinated within 30 days after they have
reached 3 months of age. Unvaccinated dogs, cats, and ferrets acquired
or moved into the state shall be vaccinated within 30 days after
purchase or arrival, unless under 3 months of age, as specified above.
Every dog, cat, and ferret shall be revaccinated between 9 and 12 months
after the initial vaccination and subsequently receive booster vaccines
as outlined in the most current National Association of State Public
Health Veterinarians' Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and
Control. In rabies infected areas, dogs, cats, and ferrets recently
vaccinated shall be kept under control for at least 30 days before being
allowed to run free.
                                             
 II. A rabies immunization exemption may be issued, where illness or
a veterinary medical condition warrants, by the local rabies control
authority upon the written recommendation of a veterinarian licensed
under RSA 332-B. The recommendation shall also be signed by an American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine diplomate and the state
veterinarian. The exempted animal shall be maintained in strict rabies
isolation, under conditions that are at the discretion of the local
rabies control authority, until such time as the medical condition has
been resolved and the animal can be immunized against rabies. Exempted
animals shall not be allowed outdoors without being on a leash and shall
be under the direct physical control of an adult owner at all times. In
addition, when the animal is outdoors, it shall be muzzled in a manner
approved by the local rabies control authority. The exemption shall be
valid for no more than one year from the date of the last signature on
the written recommendation for exemption.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:3. 1995, 202:4, eff. June 12, 1995.
2007, 79:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008. 2009, 296:12, eff. Sept. 29, 2009.

### Section 436:101

 **436:101 Owner's Statement. –**
                                             
 I. Before vaccinating any dog, cat, or ferret for rabies, the
veterinarian shall receive the following statement completed by the
dog's, cat's, or ferret's owner in the veterinarian's presence on the
same day: I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (owner's name) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
swear that to my knowledge this dog, cat, or ferret has not bitten
anyone within 10 days. The veterinarian shall retain the statement in
the veterinarian's files until the dog's, cat's, or ferret's next
vaccination.
                                             
 II. Any owner who submits a false statement shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:4. 1995, 202:5, eff. June 12, 1995.

### Section 436:102

 **436:102 Duties of Veterinarian. –** It shall be the duty of each
veterinarian, at the time of vaccinating any dog, cat, or ferret, to
complete a certificate of rabies vaccination in triplicate which
includes the following information: owner's name and address,
description of dog, cat, or ferret (breed, sex, markings, age, name),
date of vaccination, rabies vaccination tag number, type of rabies
vaccine administered, manufacturer's serial number of vaccine, and the
expiration date of the vaccination. Distribution of copies of the
certificate shall be: the original to the owner, one copy retained by
the issuing veterinarian and, within 40 days of the vaccination, one
copy to the town or city clerk where the dog, cat, or ferret is kept.
The veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies for the
interval between vaccinations specified in RSA 436:100. A metal or
durable plastic tag, serially numbered, shall be securely attached to
the collar or harness of the dog. Whenever the dog is out-of-doors, off
the owner's premises, and not under the control of the owner or handler
while working the dog, the collar or harness with the vaccination tag
shall be worn. For the purposes of this section, "working the dog''
means a dog doing a defined functional canine activity with its owner or
handler such as hunting, field work, drafting, and guarding, working, or
herding livestock, as defined in RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4), or participating
in any lawful competitive event, including, but not limited to,
conformation shows or obedience trials, field trials, agility events,
hunts, sled races, or training activities pertinent to functional canine
activities. Cats and ferrets shall not be required to wear the collar or
harness with the tag.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1990, 17:1. 1992, 250:5. 1994, 353:1. 1995,
202:6, eff. June 12, 1995. 2006, 11:4, eff. Mar. 3, 2006.

### Section 436:103

 **436:103 Cost. –** The cost of rabies vaccination shall be paid by
the owner of the dog, cat, or ferret.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:6. 1995, 202:7, eff. June 12, 1995.

### Section 436:104

 **436:104 Transient Dogs, Cats, or Ferrets. –** The provisions of
this subdivision with respect to vaccination shall apply to any dog,
cat, or ferret owned by a person temporarily remaining within the state
of New Hampshire, any dog, cat, or ferret brought into the state for
show purposes, racing or transient hunting dogs or dogs brought into the
state for field trials; each dog, cat, or ferret shall be accompanied by
individual rabies certificates and tags showing date of vaccination and
type of vaccine used with expiration date.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1990, 17:2. 1992, 250:7. 1995, 202:8, eff. June
12, 1995.

### Section 436:105

 **436:105 Impoundment of Dog Rabies Suspects. –**
                                             
 I. Any dog displaying symptoms which indicate a likelihood that such
dog is afflicted with rabies which has bitten a person and caused a
puncture of the skin or which has caused a nonbite exposure shall be
immediately euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public
health laboratory, department of health and human services. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner for any expense for euthanizing the dog
and for preparing the head for shipment to the public health laboratory.
If the dog is a stray, the rabies control authority shall be responsible
for the expense, and such expense shall be paid from fees collected
under RSA 466:4 and 466:6.
                                             
 II. Any apparently healthy dog not vaccinated in accordance with RSA
436:100, or whose vaccination status is unknown which has bitten any
person and caused a puncture of the skin or which has caused a nonbite
exposure of such person, shall be seized and impounded under the
supervision of the local authorities for a period of not less than 10
days. If, upon examination by a licensed veterinarian, the dog has no
signs of rabies at the end of said impoundment, it may be released to
the owner or, in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in
accordance with applicable laws. Any illness in the dog during
confinement or before release shall be evaluated by a licensed
veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies develop, the dog shall be
euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public health
laboratory, department of health and human services. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner for any expense for the examination and for
the impoundment of the dog. The owner shall also be responsible for any
expense for euthanizing the dog and for preparing the head for shipment
to the public health laboratory. If the dog is a stray, the rabies
control authority shall be responsible for the expense, and such expense
shall be paid from fees collected under RSA 466:4 and 466:6.
                                             
 III. Except as provided in RSA 436:105-b, any healthy dog vaccinated
in accordance with RSA 436:100, which has bitten any person and caused a
puncture of the skin or caused a nonbite exposure, shall be confined by
the owner or other responsible person as required by local authorities
for a period of 10 days, at which time the dog shall be examined by a
licensed veterinarian. If no signs of rabies are observed by the
veterinarian, the dog may be released from confinement. Any illness in
the dog during confinement or before release shall be evaluated by a
licensed veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies develop, the dog
shall be euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public
health laboratory, department of health and human services. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner for any expense for the examination and
for the impoundment of the dog. The owner shall also be responsible for
any expense for euthanizing the dog and for preparing the head for
shipment to the public health laboratory. If the dog is a stray, the
rabies control authority shall be responsible for the expense incurred,
and such expense shall be paid from fees collected under RSA 466:4 and
RSA 466:6.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:8. 1993, 275:2. 1995, 310:181. 1996,
256:1, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 436:105-a

 **436:105-a Impoundment of Cat Rabies Suspects. –**
                                             
 I. Any cat displaying symptoms which indicate a likelihood that such
cat is afflicted with rabies which has bitten a person and caused a
puncture of the skin or which has caused a nonbite exposure shall be
immediately euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public
health laboratory, department of health and human services. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner for any expense for euthanizing the cat
and for preparing the head for shipment to the public health laboratory.
If the owner of the cat is not known, the rabies control authority shall
be responsible for the expense, and such expense shall be paid from fees
collected under RSA 466:4 and 466:6.
                                             
 II. Any apparently healthy cat not vaccinated or whose vaccination
status is unknown which has bitten any person and caused a puncture of
the skin or which has caused a nonbite exposure of the person shall be
seized and, if the owner consents, impounded under the supervision of
the local authorities for a period of not less than 10 days. If, upon
examination by a licensed veterinarian, the cat has no signs of rabies
at the end of the impoundment, it may be released to the owner. Any
illness in the cat during confinement or before release shall be
evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies
develop, the cat shall be euthanized and the head sent for examination
to the public health laboratory, department of health and human
services. It shall be the responsibility of the owner for any expense
for the examination and for the impoundment of the cat. If the owner of
the cat is not known or if the owner does not consent to impoundment,
the cat shall be euthanized upon seizure and the head sent for
examination to the public health laboratory, department of health and
human services. It shall be the responsibility of the owner for any
expense for euthanizing the cat and for preparing the head for shipment
to the public health laboratory. If the owner of the cat is not known,
the rabies control authority shall be responsible for the expense and
such expense shall be paid from fees collected under RSA 466:4 and
466:6.
                                             
 III. Any healthy cat vaccinated in accordance with RSA 436:100,
which has bitten any person and caused a puncture of the skin or which
has caused a nonbite exposure, shall be confined by the owner or other
responsible person as required by the local authorities for a period of
10 days, at which time the cat shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian. If no signs of rabies are observed by the veterinarian,
the cat may be released from confinement. Any illness in the cat during
confinement or before release shall be evaluated by a licensed
veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies develop, the cat shall be
euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public health
laboratory, department of health and human services. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner for any expense for the examination and the
impoundment of the cat, for euthanizing the cat and for preparing the
head for shipment to the public health laboratory. If the owner of the
cat does not consent to the confinement or if the owner of the cat is
not known, the rabies control authority shall be responsible for the
expense and such expense shall be paid from fees collected under RSA
466:4 and 466:6.

**Source.** 1993, 275:3. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 436:105-b

 **436:105-b Impoundment of Ferret Rabies Suspects. –**
                                             
 I. Any ferret displaying symptoms which indicate a likelihood that
such ferret is afflicted with rabies which has bitten a person and
caused a puncture of the skin or which has caused a nonbite exposure
shall be immediately euthanized and the head sent for examination to the
public health laboratory, department of health and human services. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner for any expense for euthanizing
the ferret and for preparing the head for shipment to the public health
laboratory. If the owner of the ferret is not known, the state shall be
responsible for the expense.
                                             
 II. Any apparently healthy ferret not vaccinated or whose
vaccination status is unknown which has bitten any person and caused a
puncture of the skin or which has caused a nonbite exposure of the
person shall be seized and, if the owner consents, impounded under the
supervision of the local authorities for a period of not less than 10
days. If, upon examination by a licensed veterinarian, the ferret has no
signs of rabies at the end of the impoundment, it may be released to the
owner. Any illness in the ferret during confinement or before release
shall be evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. If signs suggestive of
rabies develop, the ferret shall be euthanized and the head sent for
examination to the public health laboratory, department of health and
human services. It shall be the responsibility of the owner for any
expense for the examination and for the impoundment of the ferret. If
the owner of the ferret is not known or if the owner does not consent to
impoundment, the ferret shall be euthanized upon seizure and the head
sent for examination to the public health laboratory, department of
health and human services. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
for any expense for euthanizing the ferret and for preparing the head
for shipment to the public health laboratory. If the owner of the ferret
is not known, the state shall be responsible for the expense.
                                             
 III. Any healthy ferret vaccinated in accordance with RSA 436:100,
which has bitten any person and caused a puncture of the skin or which
has caused a nonbite exposure, shall be confined by the owner or other
responsible person as required by the local authorities for a period of
10 days, at which time the ferret shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian. If no signs of rabies are observed by the veterinarian,
the ferret may be released from confinement. Any illness in the ferret
during confinement or before release shall be evaluated by a licensed
veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies develop, the ferret shall be
euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public health
laboratory, department of health and human services. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner for any expense for the examination and the
impoundment of the ferret, for euthanizing the ferret and for preparing
the head for shipment to the public health laboratory. If the owner of
the ferret does not consent to the confinement or if the owner of the
ferret is not known, the state shall be responsible for the expense.

**Source.** 1995, 202:9; 310:181. 1998, 368:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 436:105-c

 **436:105-c Police Dogs. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding RSA 436:105, III and any other provision of law
to the contrary, a police dog which has bitten a person may remain in
service subject to the following:
                                             
 (a) The police dog shall have received its annual immunization
for rabies in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 (b) The handler of the police dog shall prepare an incident
report and submit the report to the appropriate law enforcement agency
which shall advise the appropriate local rabies control authority. The
incident report shall be confidential. The handler shall be responsible
for observing the dog for 10 days after the bite occurred and shall have
the dog examined by a veterinarian at the end of the 10-day period. If
signs suggestive of rabies develop during the 10-day period, the dog
shall be examined by a veterinarian immediately. If the dog dies or is
killed during the 10-day period, the head shall be sent for examination
to the public health laboratory, department of health and human
services.
                                             
 II. The police dog shall be limited to law enforcement duties during
the 10-day period described in subparagraph I(b).
                                             
 III. For the purposes of this section "police dog'' means a dog
employed by or on behalf of a law enforcement agency.

**Source.** 1996, 256:2, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 436:106

 **436:106 Handling of Dogs, Cats, and Ferrets Bitten by Rabid
Animals. –** In the case of dogs, cats, and ferrets known to have been
bitten by a rabid animal or to have had a nonbite exposure, the
following provisions shall apply:
                                             
 I. Unvaccinated Dogs, Cats, and Ferrets.
                                             
 (a) In the case of dogs, cats, and ferrets which are not
vaccinated in accordance with RSA 436:100 and which have been bitten by
a known rabid animal or have had a nonbite exposure, the dogs, cats, and
ferrets which were bitten or exposed to rabies shall be immediately
euthanized, unless the owner is unwilling as provided in subparagraph
(b) of this paragraph. The owner shall be responsible for the expense of
destroying and disposing of the dog, cat, or ferret. In the case of a
stray dog or cat whose owner is not known, the rabies control authority
shall be responsible for the expense, and such expense shall be paid
from the fees collected under RSA 466:4 and 466:6. In the case of a
ferret whose owner is not known, the state shall be responsible for the
expense.
                                             
 (b) If the owner is unwilling to destroy the dog, cat, or ferret,
strict isolation of the dog, cat, or ferret, in a kennel under
veterinary supervision and in cooperation with the local authorities,
for a minimum of 6 months shall be enforced. The dog, cat, or ferret
shall be vaccinated against rabies 30 days prior to completion of the
6-month impoundment. Any illness in the dog, cat or ferret during
confinement or before release shall be evaluated by a licensed
veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies develop, the animal shall be
euthanized and the head sent for examination to the public health
laboratory, department of health and human services. The expense of
vaccination shall be paid in advance by the owner, and the expense of
impoundment shall be paid monthly in advance by the owner. In case of
default in payment, the local authority may euthanize the dog, cat, or
ferret after a 10-day grace period and the head shall be sent for
examination to the public health laboratory, department of health and
human services. The expense of euthanizing the dog, cat or ferret, for
disposal of the remains, and for preparing and shipping the head, shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
                                             
 II. Vaccinated Dogs, Cats, and Ferrets. If the dog, cat, or ferret
is vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of RSA 436:100, the dog,
cat, or ferret shall be handled as follows:
                                             
 (a) The dog, cat, or ferret shall be immediately revaccinated and
confined for a period of 90 days following revaccination. Any illness in
the dog, cat, or ferret during confinement or before release shall be
evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. If signs suggestive of rabies
develop, the animal shall be euthanized and the head sent for
examination to the public health laboratory, department of health and
human services. The owner of the dog, cat, or ferret shall be
responsible for any expense incurred. The type of confinement shall be
at the discretion of the local authority. At the completion of
confinement, the dog, cat, or ferret shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian and released if found by said veterinarian to be free of
any signs of rabies.
                                             
 (b) If the dog, cat, or ferret is not immediately revaccinated,
the dog, cat or ferret shall be confined in strict isolation in a kennel
for 6 months under the supervision of the local authority in cooperation
with a licensed veterinarian. The dog, cat, or ferret shall be
vaccinated against rabies 30 days prior to completion of the 6-month
impoundment. The owner of the dog, cat, or ferret is responsible for all
expenses incurred and shall pay each month in advance. If there is
default in payment, the local authority may euthanize the dog, cat, or
ferret after a 10-day grace period, and the head shall be sent for
examination to the public health laboratory, department of health and
human services. The expense of destroying the dog, cat or ferret, for
disposal of the remains, and for preparing and shipping the head shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
                                             
 (c) The dog, cat, or ferret shall be euthanized if the owner does
not comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a) or (b) of this
paragraph.
                                             
 III. (a) In the case of dogs, cats, and ferrets whose vaccination
status is unknown and whose owner cannot be located, the provisions of
RSA 436:106, I(a) shall apply.
                                             
 (b) The expense for dogs and cats shall be an expense of the
rabies control authority, and such expense shall be paid from fees
collected under RSA 466:4 and 466:6. The expense for ferrets shall be
the responsibility of the state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1990, 17:3. 1992, 250:9. 1993, 275:4. 1995,
202:10; 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 436:107

 **436:107 Impoundment of Dog Without Tag. –** The rabies control
authority shall authorize a pound or pounds, or shall enter into a
cooperative agreement with a licensed veterinarian, or licensed animal
shelter, for the establishment and operation of a pound. Any dog found
off the owner's premises and not wearing a valid vaccination tag shall
be impounded. All impounded dogs shall be given proper care and
maintenance. Each impounded dog shall be kept and maintained at the
pound for a minimum of 7 days unless reclaimed earlier by the owner.
Notice of impoundment of all dogs, including any significant marks of
identification, shall be posted at the pound as public notification of
impoundment. Any unvaccinated dog may be reclaimed by its owner during
the period of impoundment by payment of prescribed pound fees and
complying with the rabies vaccination requirement of this subdivision
within 72 hours of release. Any vaccinated dog impounded because of lack
of a rabies vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner by furnishing
proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all necessary and reasonable
impoundment fees prior to release. If the dog is unclaimed at the end of
7 days, the rabies control authority may dispose of the dog in
accordance with applicable laws or rules. If the dog is a stray, the
town shall be responsible for the expense incurred. This section shall
not apply to cats or ferrets.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1990, 17:4. 1992, 250:10. 1995, 202:11, eff.
June 12, 1995.

### Section 436:108

 **436:108 Enforcement. –** The commissioner shall enforce the
provisions of this subdivision for the control of rabies in dogs, cats,
or ferrets, and shall adopt such rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, as
necessary to carry out the intent of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:11. 1995, 202:12, eff. June 12, 1995.

### Section 436:109

 **436:109 Penalty. –** Any person who violates the provisions of
this subdivision or rule adopted under it shall be guilty of a
violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1992, 250:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

Procedure for Equines Imported From Contagious Equine Metritis
                                             
(CEM) Countries
                                             
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 436:110

 **436:110 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 II. "CEM'' means contagious equine metritis.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of agriculture, markets, and
food.
                                             
 IV. "Equine'' means horses, including ponies.

**Source.** 1993, 180:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:111

 **436:111 Procedure Established. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who wishes to establish a quarantine facility for
equines imported from CEM affected countries shall have the farm
inspected and approved by the department of agriculture, markets, and
food.
                                             
 II. A representative of the department shall, upon request, make an
initial visit to the farm and offer suggestions for any changes
required. After this visit, the owner or manager shall prepare a drawing
of the farm and a detailed drawing of all buildings, paddocks, or
pastures intended for use in quarantine. After these drawings are
received, a final inspection shall be made for approval by the state
veterinarian.

**Source.** 1993, 180:1. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 436:112

 **436:112 Fees; Special Fund Established. –** The commissioner shall
establish fees for inspections required under this subdivision and for
handling and testing equines. There is established in the office of the
state treasurer the CEM fund to which all fees collected under this
subdivision shall be credited. The fund shall be nonlapsing and
continually appropriated to the department and the moneys in the fund
shall only be expended for the administration of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1993, 180:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 436:113

 **436:113 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Quarantine procedures.
                                             
 II. Fees authorized under this subdivision.
                                             
 III. Laboratory testing.
                                             
 IV. The application procedure to establish a quarantine facility.
                                             
 V. Standards and criteria for an equine quarantine facility.
                                             
 VI. The application procedure to receive equines that require
quarantine.

**Source.** 1993, 180:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1994. 2012, 171:21, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 436:114

 **436:114 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates this subdivision or any rule adopted
under this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person who violates this subdivision or any
rule adopted under it may be subject to an administrative fine levied by
the commissioner not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1993, 180:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

Testing of Domestic Animals
---------------------------

### Section 436:115

 **436:115 Testing of Domestic Animals; Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food may test for
disease any domestic animal, as defined by RSA 436:1, that cannot be
tested by an accredited veterinarian. The commissioner shall establish
fees for such testing which shall be sufficient to carry out any tests
performed under this subdivision. The fee shall include, but not be
limited to, the costs of mileage, hourly wage, and lodging.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA-541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) A fee schedule for testing of domestic animals under
paragraph I.
                                             
 (b) Any other fees necessary to carry out the testing.
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1998, 8:1. 1999, 245:1, eff. July 1, 1999. 2012, 171:26, XX,
eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

Voluntary Scrapie Flock Certification Program
---------------------------------------------

### Section 436:116

 **436:116 Program Goals; Applicable Federal Regulations. –** The
voluntary scrapie flock certification program is a cooperative effort
between APHIS (Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, United States
Department of Agriculture), participating state governments, and sheep
and goat producing industries, established and maintained to reduce
scrapie's occurrence and spread, identify flocks that have been free of
evidence of scrapie over specified time periods, and contribute to the
eventual eradication of scrapie. Applicable federal regulations
regarding the program and its requirements are contained in 9 CFR parts
54 and 79. Compliance with requirements outlined by this subdivision
does not excuse program participants from compliance with the complete
program requirements provided by 9 CFR parts 54 and 79.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 436:117

 **436:117 Scrapie Certification Board; Membership; Meetings. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the state scrapie certification board
which shall administer the voluntary scrapie flock certification
program, review program enrollment applications and status advancement,
review situations that may result in a reduction of certification status
or dismissal from the program, educate producers regarding scrapie, and
review and define policies regarding the administration of the program
within the state.
                                             
 II. The board shall consist of 9 members, including:
                                             
 (a) The Area Veterinarian-in-Charge (federal Veterinarian), or
designee;
                                             
 (b) The state veterinarian, or designee;
                                             
 (c) One practicing accredited veterinarian;
                                             
 (d) One member of the university of New Hampshire cooperative
extension; and
                                             
 (e) Five goat or sheep producers, with no more than 3 members
from either industry.
                                             
 III. Members specified under subparagraphs II(c)-(e) shall be
nominated by breed associations and registries, in consultation with the
Area Veterinarian-in-Charge or AVIC designee, and approved by the state
veterinarian.
                                             
 IV. The board shall choose one of its members who is an enrolled
producer to serve as its chairperson, and may choose such other officers
as it deems expedient. All board members shall be voting members. Five
members shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 V. Members specified under subparagraphs II(c)-(e) shall serve
3-year terms, except that the terms of no more than 3 such members may
expire in any one calendar year. Original appointments for terms of less
than 3 years may be made in order to comply with this limitation. Upon
expiration of a member's term, the member shall serve until a successor
is qualified and appointed. There shall be no limit to the number of
terms such members may serve. Vacancies occurring prior to the
expiration of a specific term shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term. The Area Veterinarian-in-Charge Designee and the state
veterinarian shall be ex officio members.
                                             
 VI. The board shall meet at least annually and quarterly if
necessary, on or about the 15th of the month, and at such other times as
it may deem necessary. Prior to any meeting of the board, there shall be
published an agenda for the meeting. Minutes of each meeting shall be
taken and logged as board records.
                                             
 VII. Complete board records shall be kept at the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 VIII. An updated list of participating state flocks and their
classification with regard to flock category shall be included in the
records of the board.
                                             
 IX. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001. 2006, 26:1, 2, 5, eff. May
30, 2006.

### Section 436:118

 **436:118 Application for Entry Into the Program. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant to the program shall submit a completed program
application to the Area Veterinarian-in-Charge designee. Once the
program application has been received, an authorized state veterinarian
or the AVIC or AVIC designee shall inspect the flock for evidence of
scrapie. The application shall be signed by a board subcommittee
consisting of the state veterinarian, AVIC designee, and board
chairperson. The board members shall review the application package. The
status date for initial flock enrollment shall be the date that the last
signature is applied to the application for entry into the program. The
complete application package shall include:
                                             
 (a) A completed program application;
                                             
 (b) An inventory of animals in the flock submitted by the flock
owner and verified and signed by a state veterinarian or AVIC or AVIC
designee, including at least official identification numbers, breed, and
sex information as specified by the certification category for which
applied, as determined in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 436:5;
                                             
 (c) A written statement by an accredited veterinarian, if
available, or a state veterinarian or AVIC or AVIC designee declaring
that the flock is free of scrapie to the best of his or her knowledge;
and
                                             
 (d) An inspection report by an authorized state veterinarian or
AVIC or AVIC designee, including verification of the information
provided on the application by the flock owner and verification of the
official identification of each animal listed in the application.
                                             
 II. The state veterinarian or AVIC or AVIC designee shall provide
each enrolling program participant and his or her accredited
veterinarian with an educational scrapie review. Once approved to enter
the program, a flock shall be issued an enrollment date. This date shall
serve as the status date until the flock fails to meet any of the
program standards.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001. 2006, 26:3, eff. May 30,
2006.

### Section 436:119

 **436:119 Advancement in the Program. –**
                                             
 I. When a flock has obtained a status that has met all of the
program standards, the flock owner may apply to advance the flock to
certified status. The board shall review advancement applications for
movement from enrolled status to certified status at the next regularly
scheduled board meeting.
                                             
 II. The advancement application package shall include:
                                             
 (a) A completed program advancement application form.
                                             
 (b) An inspection report prepared by a state veterinarian or AVIC
or AVIC designee.
                                             
 (c) An inventory report submitted by the flock owner and verified
and signed by a state veterinarian or AVIC or AVIC designee.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 436:120

 **436:120 Maintenance of Status. –**
                                             
 I. A flock's status date shall be maintained if, during an annual
inspection it meets the requirements of 9 C.F.R. parts 54 and 79 and the
Scrapie Eradication Uniform Methods and Rules adopted by the Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture.
                                             
 II. If, during the year at the current status, a flock has not met
the minimum requirements for the status currently held, the flock's
status date shall convert to the date when the flock was brought back
into program compliance.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001. 2006, 26:4, eff. May 30,
2006.

### Section 436:121

 **436:121 Downgrading of Status. –** The board shall recommend
downgrading a participating flock's status or removing it from the
program if its owner or manager has not complied with the program
standards, unless a compelling argument based upon sound scientific
principles can be presented. A flock may reenter the program after
fulfilling board-determined and program requirements.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 436:122

 **436:122 Appeal. –** Owner-reported changes in flock status or
status date due to flock additions or commingling shall be made as soon
as possible following notification of the board or AVIC without review
by the board unless the owner requests that the board perform a formal
review at the time the acquisition or commingling is reported. The board
shall give the owner of the flock an opportunity to present his or her
views to the board before it makes its final recommendation regarding
reduction or removal. The status of the flock, notification regarding a
change in flock status, and any appeal of flock status shall be decided
in accordance with 9 CFR parts 54 and 79.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 436:123

 **436:123 Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of paragraph II shall apply in any instance when a
sheep or goat producer has entered the program and has voluntarily
requested technical help from the board or is inspected by a state
animal health official on behalf of the board as established under 9 CFR
Parts 54 and 79, and is not at the time the subject of an active
enforcement action.
                                             
 II. With the exception of the state and federal veterinarians,
acting in their official capacity, state board members and agents of the
board shall not make available to any other regulatory or enforcement
agency not involved in the program, or to the public, information
obtained in the course of such help or inspection unless:
                                             
 (a) The person receiving such inspection agrees that such
information may be released;
                                             
 (b) The information reveals an imminent threat to human life of
the environment;
                                             
 (c) The information reveals evidence of a knowing criminal
violation;
                                             
 (d) The information is presented in aggregate form with no
identification of individual entities; or
                                             
 (e) The board first notifies any person requesting technical help
of the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 2001, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.
