---
title: 'CHAPTER 437-A ANIMAL POPULATION CONTROL'
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 437-A
                                             
ANIMAL POPULATION CONTROL
-------------------------

### Section 437-A:1

 **437-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of agriculture, markets, and
food.
                                             
 III. "Fund'' means the companion animal neutering fund established
in RSA 437-A:4-a.

**Source.** 1993, 219:3. 1995, 130:4. 1997, 332:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1997.

### Section 437-A:2

 **437-A:2 Program Established. –** The department shall establish
and implement an animal population control program. The purpose of this
program shall be to reduce the population of unwanted and stray dogs and
cats by encouraging the owners of dogs and cats to have them permanently
sexually sterilized, thereby reducing potential threats to public health
and safety from mid-Atlantic rabies and other sources. The program shall
not begin operation until June 1, 1994. The commissioner shall report
relative to the progress of the program beginning on September 1, 1994,
to the president of the senate, the speaker of the house and the
governor within its biennial report pursuant to RSA 20:7.

**Source.** 1993, 219:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1994. 2015, 259:22, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 437-A:3

 **437-A:3 Eligibility of Owner of Dog or Cat to Participate. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A resident of the state who owns a dog or cat and who is
eligible for one of the following programs shall also be eligible to
participate in a reduced fee companion animal population control program
if the owner signs a consent form certifying that the person is the
owner of the dog or cat or is authorized by the owner to present the dog
or cat for the procedure and such person pays a fee of 
                                             $25:
                                             
 (1) The Food Stamp Program authorized by Title XIII of the
Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. section 2011 et seq.) and RSA
161:2, XIII.
                                             
 (2) The Supplemental Security Income Program established
pursuant to Title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. section 1381
et seq.).
                                             
 (3) The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Act
established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. section 601 et seq. and RSA 161-B.
                                             
 (4) The aid to the needy blind program established under RSA
161:2, V.
                                             
 (5) The medicaid program established under RSA 167.
                                             
 (6) The old age assistance program established under RSA 167.
                                             
 (7) The aid to the permanently and totally disabled program
established under RSA 167.
                                             
 (b) A resident of the state who owns a dog or cat and has a
household income at or below 130 percent of the federal poverty
guidelines shall also be eligible to participate in a reduced fee
companion animal population control program if the owner signs a consent
form certifying that the person is the owner of the dog or cat or is
authorized by the owner to present the dog or cat for the procedure and
such person pays a fee of 
                                             $25.
                                             
 II. Dogs and cats imported from out of state into New Hampshire
animal shelters or adoption agencies shall not be eligible for this
program.

**Source.** 1993, 219:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1994. 2002, 161:1, eff. July 1,
2002. 2004, 61:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005. 2005, 194:1, eff. July 1, 2005.
2009, 98:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2014, 187:1, eff. July 11, 2014.

### Section 437-A:4

 **437-A:4 Veterinarian Participation. –**
                                             
 I. Any veterinarian licensed in this state may participate in the
program established under this chapter. A veterinarian shall file with
the commissioner an application on which such veterinarian shall supply,
in addition to any other information requested by the commissioner, a
fee schedule listing the fees charged for animal sterilization,
examination, and the presurgical immunizations specified in RSA 437-A:4,
II(b) in the normal course of business. The animal sterilization fee may
vary with the animal's weight, sex and species. The commissioner may,
however, disqualify from participation in the program any veterinarian
whose fees are deemed unreasonable. A fee shall be determined
unreasonable if the fee is more than 20 percent greater than the average
fee of all those who have applied to participate in the program for the
following calendar year. Any application submitted after January 1 will
be judged against the existing average for that calendar year.
                                             
 II. (a) The commissioner shall reimburse, to the extent funds are
available, participating veterinarians for 80 percent of the fee, less
payment paid by the owner to the veterinarian as provided in RSA
437-A:3, for each animal sterilization procedure administered. To
receive this reimbursement, the veterinarian shall submit an animal
sterilization certificate which shall be signed by the veterinarian and
the owner of the animal.
                                             
 (b) For all animals sterilized under RSA 437-A:3, the
commissioner shall also reimburse, to the extent funds are available,
any licensed veterinarian of this state participating in such program
for an examination fee and the presurgical immunization of dogs and cats
against rabies. Reimbursement for the full cost of the presurgical
immunization shall be made by the commissioner to the participating
veterinarian upon the written certification, signed by the veterinarian
and the owner of the animal, that the immunization has been
administered. There shall be no additional charges to the owners of
animals sterilized under RSA 437-A:3 for examination fees or the
presurgical immunization.

**Source.** 1993, 219:3. 2000, 134:1, eff. July 7, 2000. 2008, 60:1,
eff. July 20, 2008. 2009, 98:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2012, 171:22, eff.
Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 437-A:4-a

 **437-A:4-a Fund Established; Solicitation and Acceptance of Funds.
–**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the companion animal neutering fund.
Any funds received by the commissioner under this chapter, RSA 466:4,
I(c), and RSA 466:6, III shall be deposited in the fund and shall be
used by the commissioner exclusively for implementation including
veterinarian reimbursement, promotion, and other costs associated with
the program. Moneys in the fund shall be continually appropriated to the
commissioner. Interest earnings credited to the assets of the fund shall
become part of the fund. Any balance remaining in the fund at the end of
the fiscal year shall be carried forward to the fund for the next fiscal
year.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may solicit and accept funds from any public or
private source to be used to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
All such funds shall be deposited into the fund established under
paragraph I.

**Source.** 1997, 332:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1997.

### Section 437-A:5

 **437-A:5 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules
pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Format and content of all forms required under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Proof of eligibility under RSA 437-A:3, I.
                                             
 II-a. Administration of the fund established under RSA 437-A:4-a.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1993, 219:3. 1997, 332:3, eff. Aug. 22, 1997. 2009, 98:3,
eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2012, 171:26, XXI, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 437-A:6

 **437-A:6 Enforcement; Administrative Fine. –** Any person who
knowingly falsifies proof of eligibility for, or participation in, any
program under this chapter, who furnishes any licensed veterinarian with
inaccurate information concerning the ownership of an animal submitted
for a sterilization procedure, who furnishes the commissioner with false
information concerning an animal sterilization fee schedule or an animal
sterilization certificate submitted pursuant to this chapter or who
violates any provision of this chapter or rule adopted under this
chapter may be subject to an administrative fine levied by the
commissioner not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1993, 219:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

Pet Overpopulation Committee
----------------------------

### Section 437-A:7-9

 **437-A:7 to 437-A:9 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(31), eff.
Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]
