---
title: CHAPTER 438 STANDARDS FOR WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 438
                                             
STANDARDS FOR WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
----------------------------------

### Section 438:1

 **438:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Person'' shall be construed to mean both the plural and
singular, as the case demands, and shall include individuals,
partnerships, corporations, companies, societies, and associations.
                                             
 II. "Weight(s) and (or) measure(s)'' means all weights and measures
of every kind, instruments and devices for weighing and measuring, and
any appliances and accessories associated with any or all such
instruments and devices, except that the term shall not be construed to
include meters for the measurement of electricity, gas (natural or
manufactured), or water when the same are operated in a public utility
system. Such electricity, gas, and water meters are hereby specifically
excluded from the purview of this chapter, and none of the provisions of
this chapter shall be construed to apply to such meters or to any
appliances or accessories associated therewith.
                                             
 III. "Sell'' and "sale'' means barter and exchange.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of agriculture, markets,
and food.
                                             
 V. "Inspector'' means a state inspector of weights and measures.
                                             
 VI. "Sealer'' means a sealer of weights and measures of a city.
                                             
 VII. "Intrastate commerce'' means any and all commerce or trade that
is begun, carried on, and completed wholly within the limits of the
state of New Hampshire, and the phrase "introduced into intrastate
commerce'' shall be construed to define the time and place at which the
first sale and delivery of a commodity is made within the state, the
delivery being made either directly to the purchaser or to a common
carrier for shipment to the purchaser.
                                             
 VIII. "Commodity in package form'' means a commodity put up or
packaged in any manner in advance of sale in units suitable for either
wholesale or retail sale, exclusive, however, of any auxiliary shipping
container enclosing packages that individually conform to the
requirements of this chapter. An individual item or lot of any commodity
not in package form as defined in this section, but on which there is
marked a selling price based on an established price per unit of weight
or of measure, shall be construed to be a commodity in package form.
                                             
 IX. A "consumer package'' or "package of consumer commodity'' means
a commodity in package form that is customarily produced or distributed
for sale through retail sales agencies or instrumentalities for
consumption by individuals or use by individuals for the purposes of
personal care or in the performance of services ordinarily rendered in
or about the household or in connection with personal possessions.
                                             
 X. A "nonconsumer package'' or "package of nonconsumer commodity''
means any commodity in package form other than a consumer package, and
particularly a package designed solely for industrial or institutional
use or for wholesale distribution only.
                                             
 XI. "Bureau'' means the bureau of weights and measures in the
department of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 XII. "Commercial use'' means weights and measures used or employed
in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area, or measurement of
quantities, things, commodities, or articles for distribution or
consumption, purchased, offered, or submitted for sale, hire, or award,
or in computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the
basis of weight, measure, or count. Devices used in a determination upon
which a charge or service is based include, but are not limited to, taxi
meters, odometers, timing devices, and shipping scales. "Commercial
use'' does not include the determination of the weight, measure, or
count of any commodity or thing which is performed within a plant or
business as a part of the manufacturing, processing, or preparing for
market of that commodity or thing.
                                             
 XIII. "Registered service technician'' means an individual who holds
a valid certificate of registration from the department of agriculture,
markets, and food who, for hire, installs, services, repairs,
reconditions, tests, seals, or calibrates a commercial weighing or
measuring device.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:1. 1994, 100:1. 1995, 130:4, 5, eff.
July 23, 1995. 2010, 358:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2011, 202:2, eff. July
1, 2011.

### Section 438:2

 **438:2 Systems of Weights and Measures. –** The system of weights
and measures in customary use in the United States and the metric system
of weights and measures are jointly recognized, and either one or both
of these systems shall be used for all commercial purposes in the state
of New Hampshire. The definitions of basic units of weight and measure,
the tables of weight and measure, and weights and measures equivalents
as published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology are
recognized and shall govern weighing and measuring equipment and
transactions in the state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:2, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 438:3

 **438:3 Definitions of Special Units of Measure. –** The term
"barrel'' when used in connection with fermented liquor shall mean a
unit of 31 gallons. The term "ton'' shall mean a unit of 2,000 pounds
avoirdupois weight. The term "cord'' when used in connection with wood
intended for fuel purposes shall mean the amount of wood that is
contained in a space of 128 cubic feet when the wood is ranked and well
stowed, as defined in the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Handbook 130 as revised and amended.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1994, 100:2, eff. July 10, 1994.

### Section 438:4

 **438:4 State Standards of Weight and Measure. –** Such weights and
measures in conformity with the standards of the United States as have
been supplied to the state by the federal government or otherwise
obtained by the state for use as state standards shall, when the same
have been certified as being satisfactory for use as such by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, be the state standards
of weight and measure. The state standards shall be kept in a safe and
suitable place in the office or laboratory of the state bureau of
weights and measures; they shall not be removed from the said office or
laboratory except for repairs or for certification.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:3. 1991, 10:1, eff. June 18, 1991.

### Section 438:5

 **438:5 Field Standards and Equipment. –** In addition to the state
standards provided for in RSA 438:4, there shall be supplied by the
state such "field standards'' and such equipment as may be found
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The field
standards shall be verified upon their initial receipt and at least once
each year thereafter by comparison with the state standards.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:6

 **438:6 Administration; Inspections. –** The functions, powers, and
duties provided in this chapter are vested in the department of
agriculture, markets, and food to be apprised and used by the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food as specified herein and
as otherwise provided by law. Subject to the state personnel rules, and
within the limits of available appropriations and funds, the
commissioner may employ such inspectors and assistants and incur such
expenses as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. The commissioner or his inspectors, at his direction, shall at
least once a year visit the various cities having local sealers and
inspect their work and, in the performance of duties hereunder, he shall
inspect, from time to time, the weights, measures, balances or any other
weighing or measuring devices of any person, firm, or corporation in
those cities.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:4. 1995, 130:4, 5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 438:7

 **438:7 General Powers and Duties of Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall have the custody of the state standards of
weight and measure and of the other standards and equipment provided for
by this chapter, and shall keep accurate records of such standards and
equipment.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the administrative
rules adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may issue an order to any person in violation
of this chapter, any term or condition of a license, permit or
registration issued under this chapter, or any rule adopted under this
chapter. This order may require such remedial or corrective measures as
may be necessary. The order shall require elimination of the violation
and shall set the time frame within which the remedial or corrective
measures shall be completed. Any person to whom an order is directed may
appeal to the commissioner or to the superior court.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may hold hearings concerning the issuance of
licenses, permits or registrations and the enforcement of these and any
other provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may impose administrative fines pursuant to RSA
438:40.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner shall license annually all devices used
commercially to provide services on the basis of weight, measure, or
count or to establish size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of
commodities or articles sold or offered or exposed for sale.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner shall biennially make to the governor a report
on all of the activities under this chapter within its biennial report
pursuant to RSA 20:7.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall designate the registration and
expiration dates for all licenses, permits, and registrations issued
under this chapter.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner shall make an annual report on October 1 of
each year to the house and senate committees on executive departments
and administration and to the house and senate clerks including the
number of consumer complaints, the number of inspections, and the number
of audits during the prior fiscal year for meters, scales, and other
devices.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:5. 1994, 100:3, 4, eff. July 10, 1994.
2011, 202:3, eff. July 1, 2011. 2015, 259:23, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 438:8

 **438:8 Rulemaking Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative
to:
                                             
 (a) Standards of net weight, measure, or count, and reasonable
standards of fill for any commodity in package form.
                                             
 (b) Technical and reporting procedures to be followed and the
report and record forms and marks of approval and rejection to be used
by inspectors of weights and measures in the discharge of their official
duties.
                                             
 (c) Exemptions from the inspection requirements of RSA 438:14
with respect to weights and measures of such character or size that such
inspection would be inappropriate, impracticable, or damaging, to the
apparatus in question or from standards listed in RSA 438:8, II and RSA
438:8, III which may cause, in the opinion of the commissioner,
disproportionate cost or undue economic hardship to a public solid waste
management district, as defined in RSA 53-B, a public facility, as
defined in RSA 149-M:4, or transfer station, as defined in RSA 149-M:4.
                                             
 (d) Compulsory registration of servicemen and service agencies.
                                             
 (e) Licensing of, and the technical and reporting procedures to
be followed by, public weighmasters.
                                             
 (f) Licensing of weighing and measuring devices used
commercially.
                                             
 (g) Specifications, tolerances, and other technical requirements
for weights and measures of the character of those specified in RSA
438:10, designed to eliminate from use, without prejudice to apparatus
that conforms as closely as practicable to the official standards,
those:
                                             
 (1) That are not accurate.
                                             
 (2) That are not reasonably permanent in their adjustment or
will not repeat their indications correctly.
                                             
 (3) That facilitate the perpetration of fraud.
                                             
 (h) The establishment and collection of fees for:
                                             
 (1) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (2) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (3) Examinations.
                                             
 (4) Placed-in-service forms, inspection report forms, and
certification stamps.
                                             
 (i) The imposition of fines and penalties under RSA 438:40.
                                             
 (j) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (k) The collection of fees set in departmental rules Agr 1410.03
through 1410.07.
                                             
 (l) Procedures for investigating complaints about weights and
measures generally.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may also adopt, as part of the rules, the
definitions and descriptive regulations published by the National
Conference on Weights and Measures and amendments, supplements and
revisions to such regulations. Rules under this paragraph need not be
adopted in accordance with RSA 541-A, but when adopted, shall be filed
with the director of legislative services.
                                             
 III. The specifications, tolerances, and other technical
requirements for commercial weighing and measuring devices, together
with amendments thereto, as recommended by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology and published in National Institute of
Standards and Technology Handbook 44 and supplements to Handbook 44, or
in any publication revising or superseding Handbook 44, shall be the
specifications, tolerances, and other technical requirements for
commercial weighing and measuring devices of the state of New Hampshire,
except as specifically modified, amended, or rejected by a rule adopted
by the commissioner. For the purpose of this chapter, apparatus shall be
deemed to be "correct'' when it conforms to all applicable rules adopted
as specified in this section. Other apparatus shall be deemed to be
"incorrect.''
                                             
 III-a. In the case where solid waste, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, is
weighed in a vehicle at a public facility, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, or
transfer station, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, and such solid waste
weighed is 200 pounds or less per load, paragraphs II and III shall not
apply to such weighing devices. For the purposes of this paragraph, such
solid waste weighed and collected shall be received only from a person
resident in the town or municipality of which that public facility or
public transfer station is a part. Such solid waste shall be assessed
for 100 percent of the total net weight but such assessment shall not be
for less than the minimum amount levied.
                                             
 IV. The specifications, tolerances, and other technical requirements
for standards used in the testing or calibration of commercial weighing
and measuring devices, together with amendments thereto, as recommended
by the National Conference on Weights and Measures, and published in the
National Institute of Standards and Technology Handbook 105 series and
supplements to the Handbook 105 series, or in any publication revising
or superseding the Handbook 105 series, shall be the specifications,
tolerances, and other technical requirements for standards used in the
testing and calibration of commercial weighing and measuring devices of
the state of New Hampshire, except as specifically modified, amended, or
rejected by a rule adopted by the commissioner, and shall be adopted as
part of this chapter and need not be adopted in accordance with RSA
541-A.
                                             
 V. The operational guides, for use in the field evaluation of
commercial weighing and measuring devices, by the bureau of weights and
measures and registered servicemen, together with amendments thereto, as
recommended by the National Conference on Weights and Measures, and
published in the National Conference on Weights and Measures Publication
12, Examination Procedure Outlines for weighing and measuring devices,
or in any publication revising or superseding Publication 12, shall be
the evaluation procedures used in the field evaluation of weighing and
measuring devices used commercially in the state of New Hampshire,
except as specifically modified, amended, or rejected by a rule adopted
by the commissioner, and shall be adopted as part of this chapter and
need not be adopted in accordance with RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:6, 7. 1991, 10:2. 1994, 100:5, eff.
July 10, 1994. 2003, 42:1-4, eff. July 5, 2003. 2008, 286:2, 3, eff.
Aug. 26, 2008. 2010, 358:3, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2011, 202:5, eff. July
1, 2011. 2012, 238:2, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 438:8-a

 **438:8-a Division Director; Duties. –** The director shall operate
under the duties prescribed to him or her by the commissioner, including
but not limited to:
                                             
 I. Subject to direction from the commissioner, the director of
weights and measures shall direct and supervise the functions of the
division of weights and measures including the work of the inspectors,
the metrologist, and the clerical staff.
                                             
 II. The director, in accordance with the policies of the department
of administrative services, shall keep records on the weights and
measures inspectors which shall include, by employee, the hours worked,
approval of any overtime hours worked and the reason therefor, and
accurate records of leave time accrued and used.
                                             
 III. The director shall, with the approval of the commissioner,
establish a written procedure for prosecuting violations of this chapter
and shall make judicious use of the civil penalty system in lieu of
criminal prosecution when in his or her judgment it will be equally or
more effective in enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 IV. The director shall, with approval of the commissioner, establish
a written code of conduct for the inspectors which shall be available
upon request and shall establish written regulations and standard
operating procedures for the inspectors.
                                             
 V. The director shall provide quarterly reports of investigations of
complaints to the advisory board. Such reports shall include the date
and nature of the complaint, the investigator of the complaint, and the
resolution of the complaint.

**Source.** 2012, 238:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 438:8-b

 **438:8-b Weights and Measures Advisory Board. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a weights and measures advisory board consisting
of 11 members. With the exception of the member from the general court,
the members shall be appointed by commissioner of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food, and shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) Two members nominated by the New Hampshire Grocers
Association.
                                             
 (b) One member nominated by the Oil Heat Council of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) One member who is a scrap dealer.
                                             
 (d) Two members who are farmers, one of whom is engaged in retail
of his or her products.
                                             
 (e) One legislator from the house of representatives, appointed
by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (f) One member nominated by the Propane Gas Association of New
England.
                                             
 (g) One member ** nominated by the Independent Oil Marketers
Association of New England.
                                             
 (h) One member of the general public who is not involved
commercially with weights and measures.
                                             
 (i) One member who is a weights and measures service technician
registered under RSA 438:14-a.
                                             
 II. The director of weights and measures shall serve as an
ex-officio, nonvoting member of the board.
                                             
 III. Following an initial appointment for staggered terms, each
board member shall serve for a term of 4 years. Board members shall not
serve more than 2 consecutive terms. The board shall annually elect from
among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman.
                                             
 IV. Board members shall serve without compensation, except that they
shall receive reimbursement for mileage when in the performance of their
duties. This reimbursement shall be a charge against the appropriation
for the department for weights and measures.
                                             
 V. The board shall meet at least 2 times per year at a time and
place to be fixed by the chairman. Additional meetings shall occur
either upon his or her own motion or at the request of 3 or more board
members.
                                             
 VI. The weights and measures advisory board shall regularly advise
the director of the division of weights and measures and the
commissioner on all matters related to the enforcement of this chapter.

**Source.** 2012, 238:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 438:9

 **438:9 Testing of Standards; Testing at State Supported
Institutions. –** The commissioner, or his inspectors at his direction,
at least once each year, shall test the standards of weight and measure
procured by any city for which the appointment of a sealer of weights
and measures is provided by this chapter, and shall approve the same
when found to be correct, and he shall inspect such standards at least
once each year. He shall from time to time test all weights and measures
used in checking the receipt or disbursement of supplies in every
institution for the maintenance of which moneys are appropriated by the
legislature, reporting his findings, in writing, to the supervisory
board and to the executive office of the institution concerned.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1991, 10:3, eff. June 18, 1991.

### Section 438:10

 **438:10 General Testing. –** When not otherwise provided by law,
the commissioner, or his inspectors at his direction, shall have the
power to inspect and test to ascertain if they are correct all weights
and measures kept, offered, or exposed for sale. It shall be the duty of
the commissioner, as he may deem necessary, to inspect and test to
ascertain if they are correct all weights and measures commercially used
(1) in determining the weight, measurement, or count of commodities or
things sold, or offered or exposed for sale, on the basis of weight,
measure, or of count, or (2) in computing the basic charge or payment
for services rendered on the basis of weight, measure, or of count;
provided, however, that with respect to single-service devices (that is,
devices designed to be used commercially only once and to be then
discarded) and with respect to devices uniformly mass-produced, as by
means of a mold or die and not susceptible of individual adjustment,
tests may be made on representative samples of such devices. The lots of
such samples which are representative shall be held to be correct or
incorrect upon the basis of the results of the inspections and tests on
such samples.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:8, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 438:10-a

 **438:10-a Fees for Licensing Commercial Devices. –** The following
annual device license fees shall be charged for the following
categories:
                                             
 I. Scales 100 pounds or less, 
                                             $18 each;
                                             
 II. Scales over 100 pounds to 2,000 pounds, 
                                             $27 each;
                                             
 III. Scales over 2,000 pounds to 5,000 pounds, 
                                             $54 each;
                                             
 IV. Non-vehicle scales over 5,000 pounds, 
                                             $90 each;
                                             
 V. Vehicle scales, 
                                             $180 each;
                                             
 VI. Lift truck/forklifts, on board weighing systems/scales, 
                                             $90
each;
                                             
 VII. On board weighing systems/scales, refuse or recyclable
materials collection trucks, 
                                             $90 each;
                                             
 VIII. Analytical balances, 
                                             $36 each;
                                             
 IX. Retail motor fuel dispensers, except liquefied petroleum gas and
natural gas dispensers, 
                                             $18 per meter;
                                             
 X. Liquefied petroleum gas retail motor fuel dispensers, 
                                             $54 per
meter;
                                             
 XI. Natural gas retail motor fuel dispensers, 
                                             $54 per meter;
                                             
 XII. Liquid vehicle tank meters, except liquefied petroleum gas and
natural gas meters, 
                                             $54 per meter;
                                             
 XIII. Liquid bulk storage meters, 
                                             $90 per meter;
                                             
 XIV. Liquefied gas meters, 
                                             $90 per meter;
                                             
 XV. Taxi meters, 
                                             $27 per meter; and
                                             
 XVI. Linear and cordage measures, 
                                             $18 per meter.

**Source.** 2011, 202:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 438:11

 **438:11 Investigations. –** The commissioner, or his inspectors at
his direction, shall investigate complaints made to him concerning
violations of the provisions of this chapter and shall, upon his own
initiative, conduct such investigations as he deems appropriate and
advisable to develop information on prevailing procedures in commercial
quantity determination and on possible violations of the provisions of
this chapter and to promote the general objective of accuracy in the
determination and representation of quantity in commercial transactions.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:12

 **438:12 Inspection of Packages. –** The commissioner, or his
inspectors at his direction, shall from time to time weigh or measure
and inspect packages or amounts of commodities kept, offered, or exposed
for sale, sold, or in the process of delivery, to determine whether the
same contain the amounts represented and whether they are kept, offered
or exposed for sale or sold in accordance with law. When such packages
or amounts of commodities are found not to contain the amounts
represented, or are found to be kept, offered, or exposed for sale in
violation of law, the commissioner may order them off sale and may so
mark or tag them as to show them to be illegal. In carrying out the
provisions of this section, the commissioner may employ recognized
sampling procedures under which the compliance of a given lot of
packages will be determined on the basis of the result obtained on a
sample selected from and representative of such lot. No person shall (1)
sell, or keep, offer, or expose for sale, in intrastate commerce, any
package or amount of commodity that has been ordered off sale or marked
or tagged as provided in this section unless and until such package or
amount of commodity has been brought into full compliance with all legal
requirements, or (2) dispose of any package or amount of commodity that
has been ordered off sale or marked or tagged as provided in this
section and that has not been brought into compliance with legal
requirements, in any manner, except with the specific approval of the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:13

 **438:13 Stop-Use, Stop-Removal Orders. –** The commissioner, or his
inspectors at his direction, shall have the power to issue stop-use
orders, stop-removal orders, and removal orders with respect to weights
and measures being, or susceptible of being, commercially used, and to
issue stop-removal orders and removal orders with respect to packages or
amounts of commodities kept, offered, or exposed for sale, sold, or in
process of delivery, whenever in the course of his enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter he deems it necessary or expedient to issue
such orders. No person shall use, remove from the premises specified, or
fail to remove from the premises specified, any weight, measure, or
package or amount of commodity contrary to the terms of a stop-use
order, stop-removal order, or removal order issued under the authority
of this section.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:14

 **438:14 Disposition of Correct and Incorrect Apparatus. –** The
commissioner, or his inspectors at his direction, shall approve for use
and seal or mark with appropriate devices such weights and measures as
he finds upon inspection and test to be "correct'' as defined in RSA
438:8, and shall reject and mark or tag as "rejected'' such weights and
measures as he finds, upon inspection or test, to be "incorrect'' as
defined in RSA 438:8, but which in his best judgment are susceptible of
satisfactory repair; provided, however, that such sealing or marking
shall not be required with respect to such weights and measures as may
be exempted therefrom by a rule of the commissioner adopted under the
authority of RSA 438:8. The commissioner shall condemn and may seize and
destroy weights and measures found to be incorrect if not corrected or
disposed of as required by RSA 438:19.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:14-a

 **438:14-a Registered Service Technician. –** A registered service
technician who installs, services, repairs, reconditions, tests, or
calibrates a commercial weighing or measuring device shall seal said
device in a manner approved by the commissioner. This seal shall
authorize the device owner to use a licensed device unless rejected
pursuant to RSA 438:14.

**Source.** 2010, 358:2, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2011, 202:4, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 438:15

 **438:15 Police Powers, Right of Entry and Stoppage. –** With
respect to the enforcement of this chapter and any other law dealing
with weights and measures that he or she is or may be empowered to
enforce, the commissioner, or the commissioner's inspectors at his or
her direction, is hereby vested with special police powers, and is
authorized to arrest, without formal warrant, any violator of said laws,
and to seize for use as evidence, without formal warrant, incorrect or
unsealed weights and measures or amounts or packages of commodity found
to be used, retained, offered, or exposed for sale or sold in violation
of law.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2012, 238:5, eff. June 18,
2012.

### Section 438:15-a

 **438:15-a Training of Inspectors. –** Any inspector of the
department of agriculture, markets, and food appointed to enforce the
laws and rules pertaining to weights and measures under RSA 438 shall
successfully complete the preparatory training program for part-time
police officers established by the police standards and training council
pursuant to RSA 188-F no later than 2 years from the date of hire. Upon
successful completion of the training program such inspector shall be
certified as a part-time police officer. Inspectors serving under
permanent appointment on April 27, 1990 who have the power to enforce
the laws and rules pertaining to weights and measures under RSA 438
shall also successfully complete the preparatory training program for
part-time police officers within one year of April 27, 1990 and shall,
upon completion, be certified as part-time police officers.

**Source.** 1989, 324:9. 1990, 217:2. 1995, 130:4, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 438:16

 **438:16 City Sealers of Weights and Measures; Appointment. –**
There may be a sealer of weights and measures in each city of not less
than 35,000 population, according to the latest United States census.
The sealer shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city
council; provided, however, that no person shall be so appointed until
his appointment has been approved in writing by the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food and shall hold office during good
behavior. The city sealer shall have the same power and duties in the
city as state inspectors have throughout the state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1; 189:1. 1987, 12:1. 1989, 324:10. 1995, 130:5,
eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 438:17

 **438:17 City Standards and Equipment. –** The council of each city
for which a sealer has been appointed as provided for by RSA 438:16
shall: (1) procure at the expense of the city such standards of weight
and measure and such additional equipment, to be used for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in said city, as may be
prescribed by the commissioner, (2) provide a suitable office for the
sealer, and (3) provide for the necessary clerical services, supplies,
and transportation, and for defraying contingent expenses incident to
the official activities of the sealer in carrying out the provisions of
this chapter. When the standards of weight and measure required by this
section to be provided by a city have been examined and approved by the
commissioner, they shall be the official standards for such city. It
shall be the duty of the sealer to make, or to arrange to have made, at
least as frequently as once a year, comparisons between his field
standards and appropriate standards of a higher order belonging to his
city or to the state, in order to maintain such field standards in
accurate condition. Whenever the city council of a city shall neglect
for 6 months to provide such standards, the city clerk of said city, on
notification and request by the commissioner, shall provide the same and
cause them to be tried, sealed, and deposited at the expense of the
city.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:18

 **438:18 Concurrent Jurisdiction. –** The commissioner shall have
concurrent authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter, in
cities for which sealers of weights and measures have been appointed as
provided in this chapter. City sealers shall investigate and prosecute
within the jurisdiction of the city, unless the investigation or
prosecution in the jurisdiction over a particular case or class of cases
is preempted by the state bureau of weights and measures, county
attorney or attorney general. City sealers, upon request of the bureau
of weights and measures, county attorney, or attorney general, may
assist and conduct investigations throughout the state.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1994, 100:6, eff. July 10, 1994.

### Section 438:19

 **438:19 Duty of Owners of Incorrect Apparatus. –** Weights and
measures that have been rejected under the authority of the commissioner
shall remain subject to the control of the rejecting authority until
such time as suitable repair or disposition has been made as required by
this section. The owners of such rejected weights and measures shall
cause them to be made correct within 30 days or such longer period as
may be authorized by the rejecting authority; or, in lieu of correction,
the owners may dispose of the rejected weights and measures, but only in
such manner as is specifically authorized by the rejecting authority.
Weights and measures that have been rejected shall not again be used
commercially until they have been officially re-examined and found to be
correct, or until specific written permission for such use is issued by
the rejecting authority.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:11, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 438:20

 **438:20 Method of Sale of Commodities; General. –** Commodities in
liquid form shall be sold only by liquid measure or by weight, and,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, commodities not in liquid
form shall be sold only by weight, by measure of length or area, or by
count; provided, however, that liquid commodities may be sold by weight,
and commodities not in liquid form may be sold by count, only if such
methods give accurate information as to the quantity of commodity sold.
All nomenclature, procedure, and methods of sale of commodities in this
state shall comply with the National Institute of Standards and
Technology Handbook 130 and all amendments to such handbook, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter. The provisions of this section shall
not apply (1) to commodities when sold for immediate consumption on the
premises where sold, (2) to vegetables when sold by the head or bunch,
(3) to commodities in containers standardized by a law of this state or
by federal law, (4) to commodities in package form when there exists a
general consumer usage to express the quantity in some other manner, (5)
to concrete aggregates, concrete mixtures, and loose solid materials
such as earth, soil, gravel, crushed stone, and the like, when sold by
cubic measure, or (6) to unprocessed vegetable and animal fertilizer
when sold by cubic measure. The commissioner may adopt such reasonable
rules as are necessary to assure that the amounts of a commodity sold
are determined in accordance with good commercial practice and are so
determined and represented as to be accurate and informative to all
parties at interest.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:12, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 438:21

 **438:21 Packages; Declarations of Quantity and Origin; Variations;
Exemptions. –** Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
commodity in package form introduced, or delivered for introduction
into, or received in intrastate commerce, kept for the purpose of sale,
or offered or exposed for sale in intrastate commerce shall bear on the
outside of the package such definite, plain, and conspicuous
declarations of (1) the identity of the commodity in the package unless
the same can easily be identified through the wrapper or container, (2)
the net quantity of the contents in terms of weight, measure, or count,
and (3) in the case of any package kept, offered, or exposed for sale,
or sold in any place other than on the premises where packed, the name
and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor, as
may be prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner; provided,
however, that, in connection with the declaration required under clause
(2) of this section, neither the qualifying term "when packed'' or any
words of similar import, nor any term qualifying a unit of weight,
measure, or count (for example, "jumbo,'' "giant,'' "full,'' and the
like) that tends to exaggerate the amount of commodity in a package
shall be used; and provided further that under said clause (2), the
commissioner shall, by rule, establish (a) reasonable variations to be
allowed, which may include variations below the declared weight or
measure caused by ordinary and customary exposure, only after the
commodity is introduced into intrastate commerce, to conditions that
normally occur in good distribution practice and that unavoidably result
in decreased weight or measure, (b) exemptions as to small packages, and
(c) exemptions as to commodities put up in variable weights or sizes for
sale intact and either customarily not sold as individual units or
customarily weighed or measured at time of sale to the customer.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:22

 **438:22 Declarations of Unit Price on Random Packages. –** In
addition to the declarations required by RSA 438:21, any commodity in
package form, the package being one of a lot containing random weights,
measures, or counts of the same commodity and bearing the total selling
price of the package, shall bear on the outside of the package a plain
and conspicuous declaration of the price per single unit of weight,
measure, or count.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:23

 **438:23 Misleading Packages. –** No commodity in package form shall
be so wrapped, nor shall it be in a container so made, formed, or filled
as to mislead the purchaser as to the quantity of the contents of the
packages; and the contents of a container shall not fall below such
reasonable standard of fill as may have been prescribed for said
commodity by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:24

 **438:24 Advertising Packages for Sale. –** Whenever a commodity in
package form is advertised in any manner and the retail price of the
package is stated in the advertisement, there shall be, closely and
conspicuously associated with such statement of price, a declaration of
the basic quantity of contents of the package as is required by law or
rule to appear on the package; provided, however, that, where the law or
rule requires a dual declaration of net quantity to appear on the
package, only the declaration that sets forth the quantity in terms of
the smaller unit or weight or measure (the declaration that is required
to appear first and without parentheses on the package) need appear in
the advertisement; and provided further, that there shall not be
included as part of the declaration required under this section such
qualifying terms as "when packed,'' "minimum,'' "not less than,'' or any
other terms of similar import, nor any term qualifying a unit of weight,
measure or count (for example, "jumbo,'' "giant,'' "full,'' and the
like) that tends to exaggerate the amount of commodity in the package.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:25

 **438:25 Sale by Net Weight. –** The word "weight'' as used in this
chapter in connection with any commodity shall mean net weight. Whenever
any commodity is sold on the basis of weight, the net weight of the
commodity shall be employed, and all contracts concerning commodities
shall be so construed.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:26

 **438:26 Misrepresentation of Price. –** Whenever any commodity or
service is sold, or is offered, exposed, or advertised for sale, by
weight, measure, or count, the price shall not be misrepresented, nor
shall the price be represented in any manner calculated or tending to
mislead or deceive an actual or prospective purchaser. Whenever an
advertised, posted or labeled price per unit of weight, measure, or
count includes a fraction of a cent, all elements of the fraction shall
be prominently displayed and the numeral or numerals expressing the
fraction shall be immediately adjacent to, of the same general design
and style as, and at least 1/2 the height and width of the numerals
representing the whole cents.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:26-a

 **438:26-a Grocery Stores; Prices. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, the term "grocery store'' means any
establishment or section of an establishment where food and food
products are offered to the consumer and intended for off-premise
consumption. The term includes delicatessens that offer prepared food in
bulk quantities only. The term does not include establishments which
handle only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods; roadside
markets that offer only fresh fruits and fresh vegetables for sale; food
service establishments; or food beverage vending machines.
                                             
 II. Any person who offers items for sale in a grocery store shall
mark clearly upon the package of each item sold in packaged form the
price of such item, or shall place under the shelf containing the item a
uniform shelf tag, or a larger sign indicating item price.
                                             
 III. A uniform shelf tag shall include:
                                             
 (a) The regular price of each individual item. The price numbers
shall be at least 7/16 of an inch in height;
                                             
 (b) The unit price; and
                                             
 (c) The name of the item or a description of the item.
                                             
 IV. The following items shall not require individual prices:
                                             
 (a) Cold beverages.
                                             
 (b) Snack items packaged in individual sizes and designed for
immediate consumption.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
regarding:
                                             
 (a) The pricing of items by grocery stores under this section.
                                             
 (b) The definition of snack items excepted from the requirements
of this section under subparagraph IV(b).

**Source.** 1990, 120:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 438:26-b

 **438:26-b Dating Prewrapped Sandwiches; Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person, otherwise subject to
inspection under this chapter, to make for sale, sell, offer to sell, or
procure to be sold any type of prewrapped sandwich, unless each such
sandwich is enclosed in a wrapper bearing an expiration date beyond
which the sandwich shall not be sold. This section shall not apply to
sandwiches intended or expected to be consumed within 36 hours after
wrapping.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 (a) The form of the expiration date.
                                             
 (b) Definitions, purpose, and scope.
                                             
 (c) Conduct of inspections of stores and other locations where
sandwiches are sold.
                                             
 (d) Issuance of orders, including stop-removal orders.
                                             
 (e) Fines for non-compliance not to exceed 
                                             $600.
                                             
 (f) Clarity and visibility of label date.
                                             
 (g) Guidelines on manufacturing date and labeling.
                                             
 (h) Process for handling complaints.
                                             
 (i) Establishment of expiration dates and sell by dates.
                                             
 (j) Establishing waiver procedures from rules requirements.

**Source.** 1993, 62:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1994. 2012, 171:23, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 438:27

 **438:27 Meat, Poultry, and Seafood. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 324:18, I,
eff. Aug. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 438:28

 **438:28 Bread. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 324:18, II, eff. Aug. 1,
1989.
                                             ]

### Section 438:29

 **438:29 Butter, Oleomargarine, and Margarine. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989,
324:18, III, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 438:30

 **438:30 Fluid Dairy Products. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 324:18, IV, eff.
Aug. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 438:31

 **438:31 Flour, Corn Meal, and Hominy Grits. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989,
324:18, V, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 438:32

 **438:32 Bulk Deliveries Sold in Terms of Weight and Delivered by
Vehicle. –** When a vehicle delivers to an individual purchaser a
commodity in bulk, and the commodity is sold in terms of weight units,
the delivery shall be accompanied by a duplicate delivery ticket with
the following information clearly stated, in ink or by means of other
indelible marking equipment and, in clarity, equal to type or printing,
(1) the name and address of the vendor, (2) the name and address of the
purchaser, and (3) the net weight of the delivery expressed in pounds,
and, if the net weight is derived from determination of gross and tare
weights, such gross and tare weights also shall be stated in terms of
pounds. One of these tickets shall be retained by the vendor, and the
other shall be delivered to the purchaser at the time of delivery of the
commodity, or shall be surrendered, on demand, to the commissioner, or
the inspector, or the sealer, who, if he desires to retain it as
evidence, shall issue a weight slip in lieu thereof for delivery to the
purchaser; provided, however, that, if the purchaser himself carries
away his purchase, the vendor shall be required only to give to the
purchaser at the time of sale a delivery ticket stating the number of
pounds of commodity delivered to him.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:32-a

 **438:32-a Services and Bulk Commodities Sold, Rendered, or
Delivered in Terms of Weight by Vehicle. –**
                                             
 I. When a vehicle is used to render or deliver commodities in bulk
or provide services in terms of weight units, the vendor of the bulk
commodities or services shall include with the original invoice to the
purchaser a duplicate copy of the weight ticket that represents the
actual weighing of the services or bulk commodities; provided, however,
that if the purchaser himself carries away his purchase, the vendor
shall be required only to give to the purchaser at the time of sale a
delivery ticket stating the net weight of the commodity or service.
                                             
 II. The vendor shall keep and preserve the original weight ticket
with the invoice for at least 2 years. Copies of the weight tickets and
invoices shall be open for inspection by any weights and measures
officer of the state at all reasonable times.

**Source.** 1991, 165:1, eff. July 26, 1991.

### Section 438:32-b

 **438:32-b Contents of Invoice. –** The vendor shall provide an
invoice to each purchaser of services or bulk commodities sold,
rendered, or delivered in terms of weight. The invoice shall contain,
but not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 I. Net weight.
                                             
 II. The location where the weight or service was determined.
                                             
 III. The type of service or commodity rendered.
                                             
 IV. The date such service or commodity was rendered.

**Source.** 1991, 165:1, eff. July 26, 1991.

### Section 438:33

 **438:33 Furnace and Stove Oil. –**
                                             
 I. All distillate heating oil sold at retail shall be sold by liquid
measure or by net weight in accordance with the provisions of RSA
438:20.
                                             
 II. In the case of each delivery of such liquid fuel not in package
form and in an amount greater than 100 gallons in the case of sale by
liquid measure, or 100 pounds in the case of sale by weight, there shall
be rendered to the purchaser at the time of delivery, or as otherwise
specified by the customer, a printed delivery ticket which shall clearly
state the following:
                                             
 (a) The date the product was delivered.
                                             
 (b) The name and address of the vendor, including the street,
city, state, and zip code.
                                             
 (c) The name and address of the purchaser.
                                             
 (d) The type of product being delivered.
                                             
 (e) In the case of sale by liquid measure, the liquid volume of
the delivery shall be determined by a meter with a register printing the
meter readings on a ticket from which such liquid volume shall be
computed and expressed in terms of the gallon and its binary or decimal
subdivisions (said ticket shall not be inserted into the register until
immediately before delivery is begun, and in no case shall a ticket be
in the register when the vehicle is in motion); or the liquid volume may
be determined by a vehicle tank used as a measure when in full
compliance with the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Handbook 44, as adopted by the National Conference of Weights and
Measures, and calibrated by a weights and measures official. Sale by a
liquid measuring device, as defined in said Handbook 44, and sale by a
vapor meter are excluded from this paragraph.
                                             
 (f) In the case of sales by weight, the net weight of the
delivery, together with any weighing scale readings from which such net
weight has been computed, expressed in terms of tons or pounds
avoirdupois.
                                             
 (g) If there is correction for temperature:
                                             
 (1) The net gallons or liters delivered; and
                                             
 (2) The statement: "The volume delivered has been adjusted to
the volume at 60 degrees Fahrenheit.''
                                             
 III. All invoices, whether mailed or left at time of delivery, shall
contain at least the following:
                                             
 (a) The date the product is delivered;
                                             
 (b) The name and address of the vendor, including the street,
city, state, and zip code;
                                             
 (c) The name and address of the purchaser, including the street,
city, state, and zip code;
                                             
 (d) The type of product being delivered;
                                             
 (e) The unit price, per gallon or liter, of the product being
delivered;
                                             
 (f) The total computed price for the volume delivered or the
terms of any prompt payment discount being offered to the purchaser.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:13, eff. Aug. 1, 1989. 2012, 238:4,
eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 438:34

 **438:34 Berries and Small Fruits. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 324:18, VI,
eff. Aug. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 438:35

 **438:35 Wood. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 100:8, eff. July 10, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 438:36

 **438:36 Fees. –** All fees and fines collected by a state inspector
under the provisions of this chapter shall be forwarded to the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food to be forwarded by him to
the state treasurer. All fees and fines collected by a city sealer in
that city shall be for the use of that city for the purposes of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:14. 1995, 130:5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 438:37

 **438:37 Construction of Contracts. –** Fractional parts of any unit
of weight or measure shall mean like fractional parts of the value of
such unit as prescribed or defined in RSA 438:2 and 438:3, and all
contracts concerning the sale of commodities and services shall be
construed in accordance with this requirement.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:38

 **438:38 Hindering or Obstructing Officer; Penalties. –** Any person
who shall hinder or obstruct in any way the commissioner, or any of the
inspectors, or a sealer, in the performance of his official duties shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:39

 **438:39 Impersonation of Officer; Penalties. –** Any person who
shall impersonate in any way the commissioner, or any one of the
inspectors, or a sealer, by the use of his seal or a counterfeit of his
seal shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of
a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:40

 **438:40 Offenses and Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
                                             
 (a) Use or have in possession for the purpose of using for any
commercial purpose specified in RSA 438:10, sell, offer, or expose for
sale or hire, or have in possession for the purpose of selling or
hiring, an incorrect weight or measure or any device or instrument used
to or calculated to falsify any weight or measure.
                                             
 (b) Use or have in possession for the purpose of current use for
any commercial purpose specified in RSA 438:10, a weight or measure that
does not bear a seal or mark such as is specified in RSA 438:14, unless
such weight or measure has been exempted from testing by the provisions
of RSA 438:10 or by a rule of the commissioner adopted under the
authority of RSA 438:8 or unless the device has been replaced in service
as provided by a rule of the commissioner adopted under the authority of
RSA 438:8.
                                             
 (c) Dispose of any rejected or condemned weight or measure in a
manner contrary to law or rule.
                                             
 (d) Remove from any weight or measure, contrary to law or rule,
any tag, seal, or mark placed thereon by the appropriate authority.
                                             
 (e) Sell, or offer or expose for sale, less than the quantity
represented of any commodity, thing, or service.
                                             
 (f) Take more than the quantity he represents of any commodity,
thing, or service, when, as buyer, he furnishes the weight or measure by
means of which the amount of the commodity, thing, or service is
determined.
                                             
 (g) Keep for the purpose of sale, advertise, or offer or expose
for sale, or sell any commodity, thing, or service in a condition or
manner contrary to law or rule.
                                             
 (h) Use in retail trade, except in the preparation of packages
put up in advance of sale and of medical prescriptions, a weight or
measure that is not so positioned that its indications may be accurately
read and the weighing or measuring operation observed from some position
which may reasonably be assumed by a customer.
                                             
 (i) Use commercially any device which has not been licensed in
accordance with RSA 438:7, VI.
                                             
 (j) Violate any provision of RSA 438 or of the rules adopted
under the provisions of RSA 438.
                                             
 II. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent,
recklessly performs any act prohibited, other than by rule, under this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any individual, acting as the
servant or agent of another person, who knowingly performs any act
prohibited, other than by rule, under this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. A subsequent violation of this chapter perpetrated by
anyone other than a natural person shall be a felony.
                                             
 III. Any person who, by himself or by his servant or agent, or as
the servant or agent of another person violates any rule adopted under
RSA 438:8 shall be guilty of a violation.
                                             
 IV. In addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter, any
person who violates any provision of RSA 438, or any rule or order of
the commissioner, may be subject to the imposition of an administrative
fine levied by the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each
violation.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1989, 324:15, 16. 1990, 217:1. 1994, 100:7, eff.
July 10, 1994.

### Section 438:41

 **438:41 Injunction. –** The commissioner is authorized to apply to
any court of competent jurisdiction for, and such court upon hearing and
for cause shown may grant, a temporary or permanent injunction
restraining any person from violating any provision of this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:42

 **438:42 Presumptive Evidence. –** For the purposes of this chapter,
proof of the existence of a weight or measure or a weighing or measuring
device in or about any building, enclosure, stand, or vehicle in which
or from which it is shown that buying or selling is commonly carried on
shall, in the absence of conclusive evidence to the contrary, be
presumptive proof of the regular use of such weight or measure or
weighing or measuring device for commercial purposes and of such use by
the person in charge of such building, enclosure, stand, or vehicle.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:43

 **438:43 Validity of Prosecutions. –** Inspectors and officials
appointed to enforce this chapter or any other laws dealing with weights
and measures are hereby empowered, upon their successful completion of
the preparatory training program for part-time police officers
established by the police standards and training council under RSA
188-F, to prosecute these laws within the jurisdiction of municipal and
district courts, unless the prosecutorial jurisdiction over a particular
case or class of cases is preempted by the county attorney or the
attorney general. Prosecutions for violations of any provision of this
chapter are declared to be valid and proper, notwithstanding the
existence of any law of this state dealing with matters that may be the
same as or similar to those covered by this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1. 1990, 217:3, eff. April 27, 1990.

### Section 438:44

 **438:44 Separability Provision. –** If any provision of this
chapter is declared unconstitutional, or the applicability thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of the
remainder of the chapter and the applicability thereof to other persons
and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 438:45

 **438:45 Citation. –** This chapter may be cited as the "Weights and
Measures Act''.

**Source.** 1985, 72:1, eff. July 1, 1985.
