---
title: CHAPTER 439 STATE FOOD SECURITY ACT
---

TITLE XL
                                             
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
==============================================

CHAPTER 439
                                             
STATE FOOD SECURITY ACT
-----------------------

### Section 439:1

 **439:1 Definitions. –** The following terms as used in this chapter
shall have the meanings given them in Section 1324 of the Food Security
Act of 1985, 7 USC section 1631, as amended, and in the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto: "amount 
                                             [of farm products
                                             ],'' "buyer in the
ordinary course of business,'' "commission merchant,'' "crop year,''
"description 
                                             [of farm products
                                             ],'' "farm products,'' "farm product
category,'' "reasonable description of the real estate,'' "security
interest,'' and "selling agent.''

**Source.** 2001, 102:32, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 439:2

 **439:2 Protection for Buyers of Farm Products. –**
                                             
 I. A secured party may enforce a security interest in farm products
against a buyer who, in the ordinary course of business, purchases farm
products from, or a commission merchant or selling agent who, in the
ordinary course of business, sells farm products for a person engaged in
farming operations only where the buyer, commission merchant or selling
agent has received from the secured party or seller written notice of
the security interest which complies with the requirements of Section
1324 of the Food Security Act of 1985, as amended, or where the secured
party has signed and filed with the secretary of state a form containing
the following information:
                                             
 (a) The name and address of the borrower.
                                             
 (b) The borrower's signature.
                                             
 (c) The name and address of the secured party.
                                             
 (d) The social security number of the borrower, or in the case of
a borrower doing business other than as an individual, the borrower's
Internal Revenue Service taxpayer identification number.
                                             
 (e) A description of the farm products subject to the security
interest, including the amount of such products, where applicable.
                                             
 (f) A reasonable description of the real estate, including the
name of the county, where the farm products are located.
                                             
 II. The form described in paragraph I shall be amended in writing,
and similarly signed and filed, to reflect material changes within 3
months of such changes. The effectiveness and continuation or amendment
of the form is to be treated as if it were a financing statement filed
under RSA 382-A:9. The fee for filing and indexing the form described in
paragraph I, or any continuation or amendment thereof, shall be in
accordance with RSA 478:17-g.

**Source.** 2001, 102:32, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 439:3

 **439:3 Duties of Secretary of State. –**
                                             
 I. The secretary of state or his or her designee shall develop and
implement a central indexing system containing the information filed
pursuant to RSA 439:2. Under this system the secretary of state shall
record the date and time of filing and compile the information into a
master list organized according to farm products. The list shall be
organized within each farm product category in alphabetical order
according to the last name of the borrower (or, in the case of borrowers
doing business other than as individuals, the first word in the name of
such borrower), in numerical order according to the social security or
taxpayer identification number of the borrower, geographically by
county, and by crop year. The master list shall also contain the name
and address of the secured party, the name and address of the borrower,
a description of the farm products, including amount where applicable,
subject to the security interest, and a reasonable description of the
real estate, including the county, where the farm products are located.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state shall maintain a list of all buyers of
farm products, commission merchants, and selling agents who register
with the secretary of state indicating an interest in receiving the
lists described in paragraph III. The fee for such registration shall be

                                             $100 annually.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state shall distribute, on a regular basis to
be determined by the secretary of state, to each buyer, commission
merchant, and selling agent registered under paragraph II a copy in
written or printed form of those portions of the master list which the
buyer, commission merchant, or selling agent has indicated an interest
in receiving.
                                             
 IV. Upon the request of any person the secretary of state shall
provide, within 24 hours, an oral confirmation of the filing of the form
described in RSA 439:2 followed by a written confirmation.

**Source.** 2001, 102:32, eff. July 1, 2001.
